Chapter IV: The Cruelty, Follies And Murder Of Commodus.—Part I.


The Cruelty, Follies, And Murder Of Commodus—Election Of Pertinax—His
Attempts To Reform The State—His Assassination By The Prætorian Guards.


      The mildness of Marcus, which the rigid discipline of the Stoics
      was unable to eradicate, formed, at the same time, the most
      amiable, and the only defective part of his character. His
      excellent understanding was often deceived by the unsuspecting
      goodness of his heart. Artful men, who study the passions of
      princes, and conceal their own, approached his person in the
      disguise of philosophic sanctity, and acquired riches and honors
      by affecting to despise them. 1 His excessive indulgence to his
      brother, 105 his wife, and his son, exceeded the bounds of
      private virtue, and became a public injury, by the example and
      consequences of their vices.


      1 (return) [ See the complaints of Avidius Cassius, Hist. August.
      p. 45. These are, it is true, the complaints of faction; but even
      faction exaggerates, rather than invents.]


      105 (return) [ His brother by adoption, and his colleague, L.
      Verus. Marcus Aurelius had no other brother.—W.]


      Faustina, the daughter of Pius and the wife of Marcus, has been
      as much celebrated for her gallantries as for her beauty. The
      grave simplicity of the philosopher was ill calculated to engage
      her wanton levity, or to fix that unbounded passion for variety,
      which often discovered personal merit in the meanest of mankind.
      2 The Cupid of the ancients was, in general, a very sensual
      deity; and the amours of an empress, as they exact on her side
      the plainest advances, are seldom susceptible of much sentimental
      delicacy. Marcus was the only man in the empire who seemed
      ignorant or insensible of the irregularities of Faustina; which,
      according to the prejudices of every age, reflected some disgrace
      on the injured husband. He promoted several of her lovers to
      posts of honor and profit, 3 and during a connection of thirty
      years, invariably gave her proofs of the most tender confidence,
      and of a respect which ended not with her life. In his
      Meditations, he thanks the gods, who had bestowed on him a wife
      so faithful, so gentle, and of such a wonderful simplicity of
      manners. 4 The obsequious senate, at his earnest request,
      declared her a goddess. She was represented in her temples, with
      the attributes of Juno, Venus, and Ceres; and it was decreed,
      that, on the day of their nuptials, the youth of either sex
      should pay their vows before the altar of their chaste patroness.
      5


      2 (return) [ Faustinam satis constat apud Cajetam conditiones
      sibi et nauticas et gladiatorias, elegisse. Hist. August. p. 30.
      Lampridius explains the sort of merit which Faustina chose, and
      the conditions which she exacted. Hist. August. p. 102.]


      3 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 34.]


      4 (return) [ Meditat. l. i. The world has laughed at the
      credulity of Marcus but Madam Dacier assures us, (and we may
      credit a lady,) that the husband will always be deceived, if the
      wife condescends to dissemble.]


      5 (return) [Footnote 5: Dion Cassius, l. lxxi. [c. 31,] p. 1195.
      Hist. August. p. 33. Commentaire de Spanheim sur les Cæsars de
      Julien, p. 289. The deification of Faustina is the only defect
      which Julian’s criticism is able to discover in the
      all-accomplished character of Marcus.]


      The monstrous vices of the son have cast a shade on the purity of
      the father’s virtues. It has been objected to Marcus, that he
      sacrificed the happiness of millions to a fond partiality for a
      worthless boy; and that he chose a successor in his own family,
      rather than in the republic. Nothing however, was neglected by
      the anxious father, and by the men of virtue and learning whom he
      summoned to his assistance, to expand the narrow mind of young
      Commodus, to correct his growing vices, and to render him worthy
      of the throne for which he was designed. But the power of
      instruction is seldom of much efficacy, except in those happy
      dispositions where it is almost superfluous. The distasteful
      lesson of a grave philosopher was, in a moment, obliterated by
      the whisper of a profligate favorite; and Marcus himself blasted
      the fruits of this labored education, by admitting his son, at
      the age of fourteen or fifteen, to a full participation of the
      Imperial power. He lived but four years afterwards: but he lived
      long enough to repent a rash measure, which raised the impetuous
      youth above the restraint of reason and authority.


      Most of the crimes which disturb the internal peace of society,
      are produced by the restraints which the necessary but unequal
      laws of property have imposed on the appetites of mankind, by
      confining to a few the possession of those objects that are
      coveted by many. Of all our passions and appetites, the love of
      power is of the most imperious and unsociable nature, since the
      pride of one man requires the submission of the multitude. In the
      tumult of civil discord, the laws of society lose their force,
      and their place is seldom supplied by those of humanity. The
      ardor of contention, the pride of victory, the despair of
      success, the memory of past injuries, and the fear of future
      dangers, all contribute to inflame the mind, and to silence the
      voice of pity. From such motives almost every page of history has
      been stained with civil blood; but these motives will not account
      for the unprovoked cruelties of Commodus, who had nothing to wish
      and every thing to enjoy. The beloved son of Marcus succeeded to
      his father, amidst the acclamations of the senate and armies; 6
      and when he ascended the throne, the happy youth saw round him
      neither competitor to remove, nor enemies to punish. In this
      calm, elevated station, it was surely natural that he should
      prefer the love of mankind to their detestation, the mild glories
      of his five predecessors to the ignominious fate of Nero and
      Domitian.


      6 (return) [ Commodus was the first _Porphyrogenitus_, (born
      since his father’s accession to the throne.) By a new strain of
      flattery, the Egyptian medals date by the years of his life; as
      if they were synonymous to those of his reign. Tillemont, Hist.
      des Empereurs, tom. ii. p. 752.]


      Yet Commodus was not, as he has been represented, a tiger born
      with an insatiate thirst of human blood, and capable, from his
      infancy, of the most inhuman actions. 7 Nature had formed him of
      a weak rather than a wicked disposition. His simplicity and
      timidity rendered him the slave of his attendants, who gradually
      corrupted his mind. His cruelty, which at first obeyed the
      dictates of others, degenerated into habit, and at length became
      the ruling passion of his soul. 8


      7 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 46.]


      8 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxxii. p. 1203.]


      Upon the death of his father, Commodus found himself embarrassed
      with the command of a great army, and the conduct of a difficult
      war against the Quadi and Marcomanni. 9 The servile and
      profligate youths whom Marcus had banished, soon regained their
      station and influence about the new emperor. They exaggerated the
      hardships and dangers of a campaign in the wild countries beyond
      the Danube; and they assured the indolent prince that the terror
      of his name, and the arms of his lieutenants, would be sufficient
      to complete the conquest of the dismayed barbarians, or to impose
      such conditions as were more advantageous than any conquest. By a
      dexterous application to his sensual appetites, they compared the
      tranquillity, the splendor, the refined pleasures of Rome, with
      the tumult of a Pannonian camp, which afforded neither leisure
      nor materials for luxury. 10 Commodus listened to the pleasing
      advice; but whilst he hesitated between his own inclination and
      the awe which he still retained for his father’s counsellors, the
      summer insensibly elapsed, and his triumphal entry into the
      capital was deferred till the autumn. His graceful person, 11
      popular address, and imagined virtues, attracted the public
      favor; the honorable peace which he had recently granted to the
      barbarians, diffused a universal joy; 12 his impatience to
      revisit Rome was fondly ascribed to the love of his country; and
      his dissolute course of amusements was faintly condemned in a
      prince of nineteen years of age.


      9 (return) [ According to Tertullian, (Apolog. c. 25,) he died at
      Sirmium. But the situation of Vindobona, or Vienna, where both
      the Victors place his death, is better adapted to the operations
      of the war against the Marcomanni and Quadi.]


      10 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 12.]


      11 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 16.]


      12 (return) [ This universal joy is well described (from the
      medals as well as historians) by Mr. Wotton, Hist. of Rome, p.
      192, 193.] During the three first years of his reign, the forms,
      and even the spirit, of the old administration, were maintained
      by those faithful counsellors, to whom Marcus had recommended his
      son, and for whose wisdom and integrity Commodus still
      entertained a reluctant esteem. The young prince and his
      profligate favorites revelled in all the license of sovereign
      power; but his hands were yet unstained with blood; and he had
      even displayed a generosity of sentiment, which might perhaps
      have ripened into solid virtue. 13 A fatal incident decided his
      fluctuating character.


      13 (return) [ Manilius, the confidential secretary of Avidius
      Cassius, was discovered after he had lain concealed several
      years. The emperor nobly relieved the public anxiety by refusing
      to see him, and burning his papers without opening them. Dion
      Cassius, l. lxxii. p. 1209.]


      One evening, as the emperor was returning to the palace, through
      a dark and narrow portico in the amphitheatre, 14 an assassin,
      who waited his passage, rushed upon him with a drawn sword,
      loudly exclaiming, “_The senate sends you this_.” The menace
      prevented the deed; the assassin was seized by the guards, and
      immediately revealed the authors of the conspiracy. It had been
      formed, not in the state, but within the walls of the palace.
      Lucilla, the emperor’s sister, and widow of Lucius Verus,
      impatient of the second rank, and jealous of the reigning
      empress, had armed the murderer against her brother’s life. She
      had not ventured to communicate the black design to her second
      husband, Claudius Pompeiarus, a senator of distinguished merit
      and unshaken loyalty; but among the crowd of her lovers (for she
      imitated the manners of Faustina) she found men of desperate
      fortunes and wild ambition, who were prepared to serve her more
      violent, as well as her tender passions. The conspirators
      experienced the rigor of justice, and the abandoned princess was
      punished, first with exile, and afterwards with death. 15


      14 (return) [See Maffei degli Amphitheatri, p. 126.]


      15 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxi. p. 1205 Herodian, l. i. p. 16 Hist.
      August p. 46.]


      But the words of the assassin sunk deep into the mind of
      Commodus, and left an indelible impression of fear and hatred
      against the whole body of the senate. 151 Those whom he had
      dreaded as importunate ministers, he now suspected as secret
      enemies. The Delators, a race of men discouraged, and almost
      extinguished, under the former reigns, again became formidable,
      as soon as they discovered that the emperor was desirous of
      finding disaffection and treason in the senate. That assembly,
      whom Marcus had ever considered as the great council of the
      nation, was composed of the most distinguished of the Romans; and
      distinction of every kind soon became criminal. The possession of
      wealth stimulated the diligence of the informers; rigid virtue
      implied a tacit censure of the irregularities of Commodus;
      important services implied a dangerous superiority of merit; and
      the friendship of the father always insured the aversion of the
      son. Suspicion was equivalent to proof; trial to condemnation.
      The execution of a considerable senator was attended with the
      death of all who might lament or revenge his fate; and when
      Commodus had once tasted human blood, he became incapable of pity
      or remorse.


      151 (return) [ The conspirators were senators, even the assassin
      himself. Herod. 81.—G.]


      Of these innocent victims of tyranny, none died more lamented
      than the two brothers of the Quintilian family, Maximus and
      Condianus; whose fraternal love has saved their names from
      oblivion, and endeared their memory to posterity. Their studies
      and their occupations, their pursuits and their pleasures, were
      still the same. In the enjoyment of a great estate, they never
      admitted the idea of a separate interest: some fragments are now
      extant of a treatise which they composed in common; 152 and in
      every action of life it was observed that their two bodies were
      animated by one soul. The Antonines, who valued their virtues,
      and delighted in their union, raised them, in the same year, to
      the consulship; and Marcus afterwards intrusted to their joint
      care the civil administration of Greece, and a great military
      command, in which they obtained a signal victory over the
      Germans. The kind cruelty of Commodus united them in death. 16


      152 (return) [ This work was on agriculture, and is often quoted
      by later writers. See P. Needham, Proleg. ad Geoponic. Camb.
      1704.—W.]


      16 (return) [ In a note upon the Augustan History, Casaubon has
      collected a number of particulars concerning these celebrated
      brothers. See p. 96 of his learned commentary.]


      The tyrant’s rage, after having shed the noblest blood of the
      senate, at length recoiled on the principal instrument of his
      cruelty. Whilst Commodus was immersed in blood and luxury, he
      devolved the detail of the public business on Perennis, a servile
      and ambitious minister, who had obtained his post by the murder
      of his predecessor, but who possessed a considerable share of
      vigor and ability. By acts of extortion, and the forfeited
      estates of the nobles sacrificed to his avarice, he had
      accumulated an immense treasure. The Prætorian guards were under
      his immediate command; and his son, who already discovered a
      military genius, was at the head of the Illyrian legions.
      Perennis aspired to the empire; or what, in the eyes of Commodus,
      amounted to the same crime, he was capable of aspiring to it, had
      he not been prevented, surprised, and put to death. The fall of a
      minister is a very trifling incident in the general history of
      the empire; but it was hastened by an extraordinary circumstance,
      which proved how much the nerves of discipline were already
      relaxed. The legions of Britain, discontented with the
      administration of Perennis, formed a deputation of fifteen
      hundred select men, with instructions to march to Rome, and lay
      their complaints before the emperor. These military petitioners,
      by their own determined behaviour, by inflaming the divisions of
      the guards, by exaggerating the strength of the British army, and
      by alarming the fears of Commodus, exacted and obtained the
      minister’s death, as the only redress of their grievances. 17
      This presumption of a distant army, and their discovery of the
      weakness of government, was a sure presage of the most dreadful
      convulsions.


      17 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1210. Herodian, l. i. p. 22.
      Hist. August. p. 48. Dion gives a much less odious character of
      Perennis, than the other historians. His moderation is almost a
      pledge of his veracity. Note: Gibbon praises Dion for the
      moderation with which he speaks of Perennis: he follows,
      nevertheless, in his own narrative, Herodian and Lampridius. Dion
      speaks of Perennis not only with moderation, but with admiration;
      he represents him as a great man, virtuous in his life, and
      blameless in his death: perhaps he may be suspected of
      partiality; but it is singular that Gibbon, having adopted, from
      Herodian and Lampridius, their judgment on this minister, follows
      Dion’s improbable account of his death. What likelihood, in fact,
      that fifteen hundred men should have traversed Gaul and Italy,
      and have arrived at Rome without any understanding with the
      Prætorians, or without detection or opposition from Perennis, the
      Prætorian præfect? Gibbon, foreseeing, perhaps, this difficulty,
      has added, that the military deputation inflamed the divisions of
      the guards; but Dion says expressly that they did not reach Rome,
      but that the emperor went out to meet them: he even reproaches
      him for not having opposed them with the guards, who were
      superior in number. Herodian relates that Commodus, having
      learned, from a soldier, the ambitious designs of Perennis and
      his son, caused them to be attacked and massacred by night.—G.
      from W. Dion’s narrative is remarkably circumstantial, and his
      authority higher than either of the other writers. He hints that
      Cleander, a new favorite, had already undermined the influence of
      Perennis.—M.]


      The negligence of the public administration was betrayed, soon
      afterwards, by a new disorder, which arose from the smallest
      beginnings. A spirit of desertion began to prevail among the
      troops: and the deserters, instead of seeking their safety in
      flight or concealment, infested the highways. Maternus, a private
      soldier, of a daring boldness above his station, collected these
      bands of robbers into a little army, set open the prisons,
      invited the slaves to assert their freedom, and plundered with
      impunity the rich and defenceless cities of Gaul and Spain. The
      governors of the provinces, who had long been the spectators, and
      perhaps the partners, of his depredations, were, at length,
      roused from their supine indolence by the threatening commands of
      the emperor. Maternus found that he was encompassed, and foresaw
      that he must be overpowered. A great effort of despair was his
      last resource. He ordered his followers to disperse, to pass the
      Alps in small parties and various disguises, and to assemble at
      Rome, during the licentious tumult of the festival of Cybele. 18
      To murder Commodus, and to ascend the vacant throne, was the
      ambition of no vulgar robber. His measures were so ably concerted
      that his concealed troops already filled the streets of Rome. The
      envy of an accomplice discovered and ruined this singular
      enterprise, in a moment when it was ripe for execution. 19


      18 (return) [ During the second Punic war, the Romans imported
      from Asia the worship of the mother of the gods. Her festival,
      the Megalesia, began on the fourth of April, and lasted six days.
      The streets were crowded with mad processions, the theatres with
      spectators, and the public tables with unbidden guests. Order and
      police were suspended, and pleasure was the only serious business
      of the city. See Ovid. de Fastis, l. iv. 189, &c.]


      19 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 23, 23.]


      Suspicious princes often promote the last of mankind, from a vain
      persuasion, that those who have no dependence, except on their
      favor, will have no attachment, except to the person of their
      benefactor. Cleander, the successor of Perennis, was a Phrygian
      by birth; of a nation over whose stubborn, but servile temper,
      blows only could prevail. 20 He had been sent from his native
      country to Rome, in the capacity of a slave. As a slave he
      entered the Imperial palace, rendered himself useful to his
      master’s passions, and rapidly ascended to the most exalted
      station which a subject could enjoy. His influence over the mind
      of Commodus was much greater than that of his predecessor; for
      Cleander was devoid of any ability or virtue which could inspire
      the emperor with envy or distrust. Avarice was the reigning
      passion of his soul, and the great principle of his
      administration. The rank of Consul, of Patrician, of Senator, was
      exposed to public sale; and it would have been considered as
      disaffection, if any one had refused to purchase these empty and
      disgraceful honors with the greatest part of his fortune. 21 In
      the lucrative provincial employments, the minister shared with
      the governor the spoils of the people. The execution of the laws
      was penal and arbitrary. A wealthy criminal might obtain, not
      only the reversal of the sentence by which he was justly
      condemned, but might likewise inflict whatever punishment he
      pleased on the accuser, the witnesses, and the judge.


      20 (return) [ Cicero pro Flacco, c. 27.]


      21 (return) [ One of these dear-bought promotions occasioned a
      current... that Julius Solon was banished into the senate.]


      By these means, Cleander, in the space of three years, had
      accumulated more wealth than had ever yet been possessed by any
      freedman. 22 Commodus was perfectly satisfied with the
      magnificent presents which the artful courtier laid at his feet
      in the most seasonable moments. To divert the public envy,
      Cleander, under the emperor’s name, erected baths, porticos, and
      places of exercise, for the use of the people. 23 He flattered
      himself that the Romans, dazzled and amused by this apparent
      liberality, would be less affected by the bloody scenes which
      were daily exhibited; that they would forget the death of
      Byrrhus, a senator to whose superior merit the late emperor had
      granted one of his daughters; and that they would forgive the
      execution of Arrius Antoninus, the last representative of the
      name and virtues of the Antonines. The former, with more
      integrity than prudence, had attempted to disclose, to his
      brother-in-law, the true character of Cleander. An equitable
      sentence pronounced by the latter, when proconsul of Asia,
      against a worthless creature of the favorite, proved fatal to
      him. 24 After the fall of Perennis, the terrors of Commodus had,
      for a short time, assumed the appearance of a return to virtue.
      He repealed the most odious of his acts; loaded his memory with
      the public execration, and ascribed to the pernicious counsels of
      that wicked minister all the errors of his inexperienced youth.
      But his repentance lasted only thirty days; and, under Cleander’s
      tyranny, the administration of Perennis was often regretted.


      22 (return) [ Dion (l. lxxii. p. 12, 13) observes, that no
      freedman had possessed riches equal to those of Cleander. The
      fortune of Pallas amounted, however, to upwards of five and
      twenty hundred thousand pounds; Ter millies.]


      23 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxii. p. 12, 13. Herodian, l. i. p. 29.
      Hist. August. p. 52. These baths were situated near the Porta
      Capena. See Nardini Roma Antica, p. 79.]


      24 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 79.]


      Chapter IV: The Cruelty, Follies And Murder Of Commodus.—Part II.


      Pestilence and famine contributed to fill up the measure of the
      calamities of Rome. 25 The first could be only imputed to the
      just indignation of the gods; but a monopoly of corn, supported
      by the riches and power of the minister, was considered as the
      immediate cause of the second. The popular discontent, after it
      had long circulated in whispers, broke out in the assembled
      circus. The people quitted their favorite amusements for the more
      delicious pleasure of revenge, rushed in crowds towards a palace
      in the suburbs, one of the emperor’s retirements, and demanded,
      with angry clamors, the head of the public enemy. Cleander, who
      commanded the Prætorian guards, 26 ordered a body of cavalry to
      sally forth, and disperse the seditious multitude. The multitude
      fled with precipitation towards the city; several were slain, and
      many more were trampled to death; but when the cavalry entered
      the streets, their pursuit was checked by a shower of stones and
      darts from the roofs and windows of the houses. The foot guards,
      27 who had been long jealous of the prerogatives and insolence of
      the Prætorian cavalry, embraced the party of the people. The
      tumult became a regular engagement, and threatened a general
      massacre. The Prætorians, at length, gave way, oppressed with
      numbers; and the tide of popular fury returned with redoubled
      violence against the gates of the palace, where Commodus lay,
      dissolved in luxury, and alone unconscious of the civil war. It
      was death to approach his person with the unwelcome news. He
      would have perished in this supine security, had not two women,
      his eldest sister Fadilla, and Marcia, the most favored of his
      concubines, ventured to break into his presence. Bathed in tears,
      and with dishevelled hair, they threw themselves at his feet; and
      with all the pressing eloquence of fear, discovered to the
      affrighted emperor the crimes of the minister, the rage of the
      people, and the impending ruin, which, in a few minutes, would
      burst over his palace and person. Commodus started from his dream
      of pleasure, and commanded that the head of Cleander should be
      thrown out to the people. The desired spectacle instantly
      appeased the tumult; and the son of Marcus might even yet have
      regained the affection and confidence of his subjects. 28


      25 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 28. Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1215. The
      latter says that two thousand persons died every day at Rome,
      during a considerable length of time.]


      26 (return) [ Tuneque primum tres præfecti prætorio fuere: inter
      quos libertinus. From some remains of modesty, Cleander declined
      the title, whilst he assumed the powers, of Prætorian præfect. As
      the other freedmen were styled, from their several departments, a
      rationibus, ab epistolis, Cleander called himself a pugione, as
      intrusted with the defence of his master’s person. Salmasius and
      Casaubon seem to have talked very idly upon this passage. * Note:
      M. Guizot denies that Lampridius means Cleander as præfect a
      pugione. The Libertinus seems to me to mean him.—M.]


      27 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 31. It is doubtful whether he
      means the Prætorian infantry, or the cohortes urbanæ, a body of
      six thousand men, but whose rank and discipline were not equal to
      their numbers. Neither Tillemont nor Wotton choose to decide this
      question.]


      28 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxxii. p. 1215. Herodian, l. i. p.
      32. Hist. August. p. 48.]


      But every sentiment of virtue and humanity was extinct in the
      mind of Commodus. Whilst he thus abandoned the reins of empire to
      these unworthy favorites, he valued nothing in sovereign power,
      except the unbounded license of indulging his sensual appetites.
      His hours were spent in a seraglio of three hundred beautiful
      women, and as many boys, of every rank, and of every province;
      and, wherever the arts of seduction proved ineffectual, the
      brutal lover had recourse to violence. The ancient historians 29
      have expatiated on these abandoned scenes of prostitution, which
      scorned every restraint of nature or modesty; but it would not be
      easy to translate their too faithful descriptions into the
      decency of modern language. The intervals of lust were filled up
      with the basest amusements. The influence of a polite age, and
      the labor of an attentive education, had never been able to
      infuse into his rude and brutish mind the least tincture of
      learning; and he was the first of the Roman emperors totally
      devoid of taste for the pleasures of the understanding. Nero
      himself excelled, or affected to excel, in the elegant arts of
      music and poetry: nor should we despise his pursuits, had he not
      converted the pleasing relaxation of a leisure hour into the
      serious business and ambition of his life. But Commodus, from his
      earliest infancy, discovered an aversion to whatever was rational
      or liberal, and a fond attachment to the amusements of the
      populace; the sports of the circus and amphitheatre, the combats
      of gladiators, and the hunting of wild beasts. The masters in
      every branch of learning, whom Marcus provided for his son, were
      heard with inattention and disgust; whilst the Moors and
      Parthians, who taught him to dart the javelin and to shoot with
      the bow, found a disciple who delighted in his application, and
      soon equalled the most skilful of his instructors in the
      steadiness of the eye and the dexterity of the hand.


      29 (return) [ Sororibus suis constupratis. Ipsas concubinas suas
      sub oculis...stuprari jubebat. Nec irruentium in se juvenum
      carebat infamia, omni parte corporis atque ore in sexum utrumque
      pollutus. Hist. Aug. p. 47.]


      The servile crowd, whose fortune depended on their master’s
      vices, applauded these ignoble pursuits. The perfidious voice of
      flattery reminded him, that by exploits of the same nature, by
      the defeat of the Nemæan lion, and the slaughter of the wild boar
      of Erymanthus, the Grecian Hercules had acquired a place among
      the gods, and an immortal memory among men. They only forgot to
      observe, that, in the first ages of society, when the fiercer
      animals often dispute with man the possession of an unsettled
      country, a successful war against those savages is one of the
      most innocent and beneficial labors of heroism. In the civilized
      state of the Roman empire, the wild beasts had long since retired
      from the face of man, and the neighborhood of populous cities. To
      surprise them in their solitary haunts, and to transport them to
      Rome, that they might be slain in pomp by the hand of an emperor,
      was an enterprise equally ridiculous for the prince and
      oppressive for the people. 30 Ignorant of these distinctions,
      Commodus eagerly embraced the glorious resemblance, and styled
      himself (as we still read on his medals31) the _Roman Hercules_.
      311 The club and the lion’s hide were placed by the side of the
      throne, amongst the ensigns of sovereignty; and statues were
      erected, in which Commodus was represented in the character, and
      with the attributes, of the god, whose valor and dexterity he
      endeavored to emulate in the daily course of his ferocious
      amusements. 32


      30 (return) [ The African lions, when pressed by hunger, infested
      the open villages and cultivated country; and they infested them
      with impunity. The royal beast was reserved for the pleasures of
      the emperor and the capital; and the unfortunate peasant who
      killed one of them though in his own defence, incurred a very
      heavy penalty. This extraordinary game-law was mitigated by
      Honorius, and finally repealed by Justinian. Codex Theodos. tom.
      v. p. 92, et Comment Gothofred.]


      31 (return) [ Spanheim de Numismat. Dissertat. xii. tom. ii. p.
      493.]


      311 (return) [ Commodus placed his own head on the colossal
      statue of Hercules with the inscription, Lucius Commodus
      Hercules. The wits of Rome, according to a new fragment of Dion,
      published an epigram, of which, like many other ancient jests,
      the point is not very clear. It seems to be a protest of the god
      against being confounded with the emperor. Mai Fragm. Vatican.
      ii. 225.—M.]


      32 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1216. Hist. August. p. 49.]


      Elated with these praises, which gradually extinguished the
      innate sense of shame, Commodus resolved to exhibit before the
      eyes of the Roman people those exercises, which till then he had
      decently confined within the walls of his palace, and to the
      presence of a few favorites. On the appointed day, the various
      motives of flattery, fear, and curiosity, attracted to the
      amphitheatre an innumerable multitude of spectators; and some
      degree of applause was deservedly bestowed on the uncommon skill
      of the Imperial performer. Whether he aimed at the head or heart
      of the animal, the wound was alike certain and mortal. With
      arrows whose point was shaped into the form of crescent, Commodus
      often intercepted the rapid career, and cut asunder the long,
      bony neck of the ostrich. 33 A panther was let loose; and the
      archer waited till he had leaped upon a trembling malefactor. In
      the same instant the shaft flew, the beast dropped dead, and the
      man remained unhurt. The dens of the amphitheatre disgorged at
      once a hundred lions: a hundred darts from the unerring hand of
      Commodus laid them dead as they run raging round the _Arena_.
      Neither the huge bulk of the elephant, nor the scaly hide of the
      rhinoceros, could defend them from his stroke. Æthiopia and India
      yielded their most extraordinary productions; and several animals
      were slain in the amphitheatre, which had been seen only in the
      representations of art, or perhaps of fancy. 34 In all these
      exhibitions, the securest precautions were used to protect the
      person of the Roman Hercules from the desperate spring of any
      savage, who might possibly disregard the dignity of the emperor
      and the sanctity of the god. 35


      33 (return) [ The ostrich’s neck is three feet long, and composed
      of seventeen vertebræ. See Buffon, Hist. Naturelle.]


      34 (return) [ Commodus killed a camelopardalis or Giraffe, (Dion,
      l. lxxii. p. 1211,) the tallest, the most gentle, and the most
      useless of the large quadrupeds. This singular animal, a native
      only of the interior parts of Africa, has not been seen in Europe
      since the revival of letters; and though M. de Buffon (Hist.
      Naturelle, tom. xiii.) has endeavored to describe, he has not
      ventured to delineate, the Giraffe. * Note: The naturalists of
      our days have been more fortunate. London probably now contains
      more specimens of this animal than have been seen in Europe since
      the fall of the Roman empire, unless in the pleasure gardens of
      the emperor Frederic II., in Sicily, which possessed several.
      Frederic’s collections of wild beasts were exhibited, for the
      popular amusement, in many parts of Italy. Raumer, Geschichte der
      Hohenstaufen, v. iii. p. 571. Gibbon, moreover, is mistaken; as a
      giraffe was presented to Lorenzo de Medici, either by the sultan
      of Egypt or the king of Tunis. Contemporary authorities are
      quoted in the old work, Gesner de Quadrupedibum p. 162.—M.]


      35 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 37. Hist. August. p. 50.]


      But the meanest of the populace were affected with shame and
      indignation when they beheld their sovereign enter the lists as a
      gladiator, and glory in a profession which the laws and manners
      of the Romans had branded with the justest note of infamy. 36 He
      chose the habit and arms of the _Secutor_, whose combat with the
      _Retiarius_ formed one of the most lively scenes in the bloody
      sports of the amphitheatre. The _Secutor_ was armed with a
      helmet, sword, and buckler; his naked antagonist had only a large
      net and a trident; with the one he endeavored to entangle, with
      the other to despatch his enemy. If he missed the first throw, he
      was obliged to fly from the pursuit of the _Secutor_, till he had
      prepared his net for a second cast. 37 The emperor fought in this
      character seven hundred and thirty-five several times. These
      glorious achievements were carefully recorded in the public acts
      of the empire; and that he might omit no circumstance of infamy,
      he received from the common fund of gladiators a stipend so
      exorbitant that it became a new and most ignominious tax upon the
      Roman people. 38 It may be easily supposed, that in these
      engagements the master of the world was always successful; in the
      amphitheatre, his victories were not often sanguinary; but when
      he exercised his skill in the school of gladiators, or his own
      palace, his wretched antagonists were frequently honored with a
      mortal wound from the hand of Commodus, and obliged to seal their
      flattery with their blood. 39 He now disdained the appellation of
      Hercules. The name of Paulus, a celebrated Secutor, was the only
      one which delighted his ear. It was inscribed on his colossal
      statues, and repeated in the redoubled acclamations 40 of the
      mournful and applauding senate. 41 Claudius Pompeianus, the
      virtuous husband of Lucilla, was the only senator who asserted
      the honor of his rank. As a father, he permitted his sons to
      consult their safety by attending the amphitheatre. As a Roman,
      he declared, that his own life was in the emperor’s hands, but
      that he would never behold the son of Marcus prostituting his
      person and dignity. Notwithstanding his manly resolution
      Pompeianus escaped the resentment of the tyrant, and, with his
      honor, had the good fortune to preserve his life. 42


      36 (return) [ The virtuous and even the wise princes forbade the
      senators and knights to embrace this scandalous profession, under
      pain of infamy, or, what was more dreaded by those profligate
      wretches, of exile. The tyrants allured them to dishonor by
      threats and rewards. Nero once produced in the arena forty
      senators and sixty knights. See Lipsius, Saturnalia, l. ii. c. 2.
      He has happily corrected a passage of Suetonius in Nerone, c.
      12.]


      37 (return) [ Lipsius, l. ii. c. 7, 8. Juvenal, in the eighth
      satire, gives a picturesque description of this combat.]


      38 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 50. Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1220. He
      received, for each time, decies, about 8000l. sterling.]


      39 (return) [ Victor tells us, that Commodus only allowed his
      antagonists a...weapon, dreading most probably the consequences
      of their despair.]


      40 (return) [Footnote 40: They were obliged to repeat, six
      hundred and twenty-six times, Paolus first of the Secutors, &c.]


      41 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1221. He speaks of his own
      baseness and danger.]


      42 (return) [ He mixed, however, some prudence with his courage,
      and passed the greatest part of his time in a country retirement;
      alleging his advanced age, and the weakness of his eyes. “I never
      saw him in the senate,” says Dion, “except during the short reign
      of Pertinax.” All his infirmities had suddenly left him, and they
      returned as suddenly upon the murder of that excellent prince.
      Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1227.]


      Commodus had now attained the summit of vice and infamy. Amidst
      the acclamations of a flattering court, he was unable to disguise
      from himself, that he had deserved the contempt and hatred of
      every man of sense and virtue in his empire. His ferocious spirit
      was irritated by the consciousness of that hatred, by the envy of
      every kind of merit, by the just apprehension of danger, and by
      the habit of slaughter, which he contracted in his daily
      amusements. History has preserved a long list of consular
      senators sacrificed to his wanton suspicion, which sought out,
      with peculiar anxiety, those unfortunate persons connected,
      however remotely, with the family of the Antonines, without
      sparing even the ministers of his crimes or pleasures. 43 His
      cruelty proved at last fatal to himself. He had shed with
      impunity the noblest blood of Rome: he perished as soon as he was
      dreaded by his own domestics. Marcia, his favorite concubine,
      Eclectus, his chamberlain, and Lætus, his Prætorian præfect,
      alarmed by the fate of their companions and predecessors,
      resolved to prevent the destruction which every hour hung over
      their heads, either from the mad caprice of the tyrant, 431 or
      the sudden indignation of the people. Marcia seized the occasion
      of presenting a draught of wine to her lover, after he had
      fatigued himself with hunting some wild beasts. Commodus retired
      to sleep; but whilst he was laboring with the effects of poison
      and drunkenness, a robust youth, by profession a wrestler,
      entered his chamber, and strangled him without resistance. The
      body was secretly conveyed out of the palace, before the least
      suspicion was entertained in the city, or even in the court, of
      the emperor’s death. Such was the fate of the son of Marcus, and
      so easy was it to destroy a hated tyrant, who, by the artificial
      powers of government, had oppressed, during thirteen years, so
      many millions of subjects, each of whom was equal to their master
      in personal strength and personal abilities. 44


      43 (return) [ The prefects were changed almost hourly or daily;
      and the caprice of Commodus was often fatal to his most favored
      chamberlains. Hist. August. p. 46, 51.]


      431 (return) [ Commodus had already resolved to massacre them the
      following night they determined o anticipate his design. Herod.
      i. 17.—W.]


      44 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxii. p. 1222. Herodian, l. i. p. 43.
      Hist. August. p. 52.]


      The measures of the conspirators were conducted with the
      deliberate coolness and celerity which the greatness of the
      occasion required. They resolved instantly to fill the vacant
      throne with an emperor whose character would justify and maintain
      the action that had been committed. They fixed on Pertinax,
      præfect of the city, an ancient senator of consular rank, whose
      conspicuous merit had broke through the obscurity of his birth,
      and raised him to the first honors of the state. He had
      successively governed most of the provinces of the empire; and in
      all his great employments, military as well as civil, he had
      uniformly distinguished himself by the firmness, the prudence,
      and the integrity of his conduct. 45 He now remained almost alone
      of the friends and ministers of Marcus; and when, at a late hour
      of the night, he was awakened with the news, that the chamberlain
      and the præfect were at his door, he received them with intrepid
      resignation, and desired they would execute their master’s
      orders. Instead of death, they offered him the throne of the
      Roman world. During some moments he distrusted their intentions
      and assurances. Convinced at length of the death of Commodus, he
      accepted the purple with a sincere reluctance, the natural effect
      of his knowledge both of the duties and of the dangers of the
      supreme rank. 46


      45 (return) [ Pertinax was a native of Alba Pompeia, in Piedmont,
      and son of a timber merchant. The order of his employments (it is
      marked by Capitolinus) well deserves to be set down, as
      expressive of the form of government and manners of the age. 1.
      He was a centurion. 2. Præfect of a cohort in Syria, in the
      Parthian war, and in Britain. 3. He obtained an Ala, or squadron
      of horse, in Mæsia. 4. He was commissary of provisions on the
      Æmilian way. 5. He commanded the fleet upon the Rhine. 6. He was
      procurator of Dacia, with a salary of about 1600l. a year. 7. He
      commanded the veterans of a legion. 8. He obtained the rank of
      senator. 9. Of prætor. 10. With the command of the first legion
      in Rhætia and Noricum. 11. He was consul about the year 175. 12.
      He attended Marcus into the East. 13. He commanded an army on the
      Danube. 14. He was consular legate of Mæsia. 15. Of Dacia. 16. Of
      Syria. 17. Of Britain. 18. He had the care of the public
      provisions at Rome. 19. He was proconsul of Africa. 20. Præfect
      of the city. Herodian (l. i. p. 48) does justice to his
      disinterested spirit; but Capitolinus, who collected every
      popular rumor, charges him with a great fortune acquired by
      bribery and corruption.]


      46 (return) [ Julian, in the Cæsars, taxes him with being
      accessory to the death of Commodus.]


      Lætus conducted without delay his new emperor to the camp of the
      Prætorians, diffusing at the same time through the city a
      seasonable report that Commodus died suddenly of an apoplexy; and
      that the virtuous Pertinax had _already_ succeeded to the throne.
      The guards were rather surprised than pleased with the suspicious
      death of a prince, whose indulgence and liberality they alone had
      experienced; but the emergency of the occasion, the authority of
      their præfect, the reputation of Pertinax, and the clamors of the
      people, obliged them to stifle their secret discontents, to
      accept the donative promised by the new emperor, to swear
      allegiance to him, and with joyful acclamations and laurels in
      their hands to conduct him to the senate house, that the military
      consent might be ratified by the civil authority. This important
      night was now far spent; with the dawn of day, and the
      commencement of the new year, the senators expected a summons to
      attend an ignominious ceremony. 461 In spite of all
      remonstrances, even of those of his creatures who yet preserved
      any regard for prudence or decency, Commodus had resolved to pass
      the night in the gladiators’ school, and from thence to take
      possession of the consulship, in the habit and with the
      attendance of that infamous crew. On a sudden, before the break
      of day, the senate was called together in the temple of Concord,
      to meet the guards, and to ratify the election of a new emperor.
      For a few minutes they sat in silent suspense, doubtful of their
      unexpected deliverance, and suspicious of the cruel artifices of
      Commodus: but when at length they were assured that the tyrant
      was no more, they resigned themselves to all the transports of
      joy and indignation. Pertinax, who modestly represented the
      meanness of his extraction, and pointed out several noble
      senators more deserving than himself of the empire, was
      constrained by their dutiful violence to ascend the throne, and
      received all the titles of Imperial power, confirmed by the most
      sincere vows of fidelity. The memory of Commodus was branded with
      eternal infamy. The names of tyrant, of gladiator, of public
      enemy resounded in every corner of the house. They decreed in
      tumultuous votes, 462 that his honors should be reversed, his
      titles erased from the public monuments, his statues thrown down,
      his body dragged with a hook into the stripping room of the
      gladiators, to satiate the public fury; and they expressed some
      indignation against those officious servants who had already
      presumed to screen his remains from the justice of the senate.
      But Pertinax could not refuse those last rites to the memory of
      Marcus, and the tears of his first protector Claudius Pompeianus,
      who lamented the cruel fate of his brother-in-law, and lamented
      still more that he had deserved it. 47


      461 (return) [ The senate always assembled at the beginning of
      the year, on the night of the 1st January, (see Savaron on Sid.
      Apoll. viii. 6,) and this happened the present year, as usual,
      without any particular order.—G from W.]


      462 (return) [ What Gibbon improperly calls, both here and in the
      note, tumultuous decrees, were no more than the applauses and
      acclamations which recur so often in the history of the emperors.
      The custom passed from the theatre to the forum, from the forum
      to the senate. Applauses on the adoption of the Imperial decrees
      were first introduced under Trajan. (Plin. jun. Panegyr. 75.) One
      senator read the form of the decree, and all the rest answered by
      acclamations, accompanied with a kind of chant or rhythm. These
      were some of the acclamations addressed to Pertinax, and against
      the memory of Commodus. Hosti patriæ honores detrahantur.
      Parricidæ honores detrahantur. Ut salvi simus, Jupiter, optime,
      maxime, serva nobis Pertinacem. This custom prevailed not only in
      the councils of state, but in all the meetings of the senate.
      However inconsistent it may appear with the solemnity of a
      religious assembly, the early Christians adopted and introduced
      it into their synods, notwithstanding the opposition of some of
      the Fathers, particularly of St. Chrysostom. See the Coll. of
      Franc. Bern. Ferrarius de veterum acclamatione in Grævii Thesaur.
      Antiq. Rom. i. 6.—W. This note is rather hypercritical, as
      regards Gibbon, but appears to be worthy of preservation.—M.]


      47 (return) [ Capitolinus gives us the particulars of these
      tumultuary votes, which were moved by one senator, and repeated,
      or rather chanted by the whole body. Hist. August. p. 52.]


      These effusions of impotent rage against a dead emperor, whom the
      senate had flattered when alive with the most abject servility,
      betrayed a just but ungenerous spirit of revenge.


      The legality of these decrees was, however, supported by the
      principles of the Imperial constitution. To censure, to depose,
      or to punish with death, the first magistrate of the republic,
      who had abused his delegated trust, was the ancient and undoubted
      prerogative of the Roman senate; 48 but the feeble assembly was
      obliged to content itself with inflicting on a fallen tyrant that
      public justice, from which, during his life and reign, he had
      been shielded by the strong arm of military despotism. 481


      48 (return) [ The senate condemned Nero to be put to death more
      majorum. Sueton. c. 49.]


      481 (return) [ No particular law assigned this right to the
      senate: it was deduced from the ancient principles of the
      republic. Gibbon appears to infer, from the passage of Suetonius,
      that the senate, according to its ancient right, punished Nero
      with death. The words, however, more majerum refer not to the
      decree of the senate, but to the kind of death, which was taken
      from an old law of Romulus. (See Victor. Epit. Ed. Artzen p. 484,
      n. 7.)—W.]


      Pertinax found a nobler way of condemning his predecessor’s
      memory; by the contrast of his own virtues with the vices of
      Commodus. On the day of his accession, he resigned over to his
      wife and son his whole private fortune; that they might have no
      pretence to solicit favors at the expense of the state. He
      refused to flatter the vanity of the former with the title of
      Augusta; or to corrupt the inexperienced youth of the latter by
      the rank of Cæsar. Accurately distinguishing between the duties
      of a parent and those of a sovereign, he educated his son with a
      severe simplicity, which, while it gave him no assured prospect
      of the throne, might in time have rendered him worthy of it. In
      public, the behavior of Pertinax was grave and affable. He lived
      with the virtuous part of the senate, (and, in a private station,
      he had been acquainted with the true character of each
      individual,) without either pride or jealousy; considered them as
      friends and companions, with whom he had shared the danger of the
      tyranny, and with whom he wished to enjoy the security of the
      present time. He very frequently invited them to familiar
      entertainments, the frugality of which was ridiculed by those who
      remembered and regretted the luxurious prodigality of Commodus.
      49


      49 (return) [ Dion (l. lxxiii. p. 1223) speaks of these
      entertainments, as a senator who had supped with the emperor;
      Capitolinus, (Hist. August. p. 58,) like a slave, who had
      received his intelligence from one the scullions.]


      To heal, as far as it was possible, the wounds inflicted by the
      hand of tyranny, was the pleasing, but melancholy, task of
      Pertinax. The innocent victims, who yet survived, were recalled
      from exile, released from prison, and restored to the full
      possession of their honors and fortunes. The unburied bodies of
      murdered senators (for the cruelty of Commodus endeavored to
      extend itself beyond death) were deposited in the sepulchres of
      their ancestors; their memory was justified and every consolation
      was bestowed on their ruined and afflicted families. Among these
      consolations, one of the most grateful was the punishment of the
      Delators; the common enemies of their master, of virtue, and of
      their country. Yet even in the inquisition of these legal
      assassins, Pertinax proceeded with a steady temper, which gave
      every thing to justice, and nothing to popular prejudice and
      resentment.


      The finances of the state demanded the most vigilant care of the
      emperor. Though every measure of injustice and extortion had been
      adopted, which could collect the property of the subject into the
      coffers of the prince, the rapaciousness of Commodus had been so
      very inadequate to his extravagance, that, upon his death, no
      more than eight thousand pounds were found in the exhausted
      treasury, 50 to defray the current expenses of government, and to
      discharge the pressing demand of a liberal donative, which the
      new emperor had been obliged to promise to the Prætorian guards.
      Yet under these distressed circumstances, Pertinax had the
      generous firmness to remit all the oppressive taxes invented by
      Commodus, and to cancel all the unjust claims of the treasury;
      declaring, in a decree of the senate, “that he was better
      satisfied to administer a poor republic with innocence, than to
      acquire riches by the ways of tyranny and dishonor.” Economy and
      industry he considered as the pure and genuine sources of wealth;
      and from them he soon derived a copious supply for the public
      necessities. The expense of the household was immediately reduced
      to one half. All the instruments of luxury Pertinax exposed to
      public auction, 51 gold and silver plate, chariots of a singular
      construction, a superfluous wardrobe of silk and embroidery, and
      a great number of beautiful slaves of both sexes; excepting only,
      with attentive humanity, those who were born in a state of
      freedom, and had been ravished from the arms of their weeping
      parents. At the same time that he obliged the worthless favorites
      of the tyrant to resign a part of their ill-gotten wealth, he
      satisfied the just creditors of the state, and unexpectedly
      discharged the long arrears of honest services. He removed the
      oppressive restrictions which had been laid upon commerce, and
      granted all the uncultivated lands in Italy and the provinces to
      those who would improve them; with an exemption from tribute
      during the term of ten years. 52


      50 (return) [ Decies. The blameless economy of Pius left his
      successors a treasure of vicies septies millies, above two and
      twenty millions sterling. Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1231.]


      51 (return) [ Besides the design of converting these useless
      ornaments into money, Dion (l. lxxiii. p. 1229) assigns two
      secret motives of Pertinax. He wished to expose the vices of
      Commodus, and to discover by the purchasers those who most
      resembled him.]


      52 (return) [ Though Capitolinus has picked up many idle tales of
      the private life of Pertinax, he joins with Dion and Herodian in
      admiring his public conduct.]


      Such a uniform conduct had already secured to Pertinax the
      noblest reward of a sovereign, the love and esteem of his people.


      Those who remembered the virtues of Marcus were happy to
      contemplate in their new emperor the features of that bright
      original; and flattered themselves, that they should long enjoy
      the benign influence of his administration. A hasty zeal to
      reform the corrupted state, accompanied with less prudence than
      might have been expected from the years and experience of
      Pertinax, proved fatal to himself and to his country. His honest
      indiscretion united against him the servile crowd, who found
      their private benefit in the public disorders, and who preferred
      the favor of a tyrant to the inexorable equality of the laws. 53


      53 (return) [ Leges, rem surdam, inexorabilem esse. T. Liv. ii.
      3.]


      Amidst the general joy, the sullen and angry countenance of the
      Prætorian guards betrayed their inward dissatisfaction. They had
      reluctantly submitted to Pertinax; they dreaded the strictness of
      the ancient discipline, which he was preparing to restore; and
      they regretted the license of the former reign. Their discontents
      were secretly fomented by Lætus, their præfect, who found, when
      it was too late, that his new emperor would reward a servant, but
      would not be ruled by a favorite. On the third day of his reign,
      the soldiers seized on a noble senator, with a design to carry
      him to the camp, and to invest him with the Imperial purple.
      Instead of being dazzled by the dangerous honor, the affrighted
      victim escaped from their violence, and took refuge at the feet
      of Pertinax. A short time afterwards, Sosius Falco, one of the
      consuls of the year, a rash youth, 54 but of an ancient and
      opulent family, listened to the voice of ambition; and a
      conspiracy was formed during a short absence of Pertinax, which
      was crushed by his sudden return to Rome, and his resolute
      behavior. Falco was on the point of being justly condemned to
      death as a public enemy had he not been saved by the earnest and
      sincere entreaties of the injured emperor, who conjured the
      senate, that the purity of his reign might not be stained by the
      blood even of a guilty senator.


      54 (return) [ If we credit Capitolinus, (which is rather
      difficult,) Falco behaved with the most petulant indecency to
      Pertinax, on the day of his accession. The wise emperor only
      admonished him of his youth and in experience. Hist. August. p.
      55.]


      These disappointments served only to irritate the rage of the
      Prætorian guards. On the twenty-eighth of March, eighty-six days
      only after the death of Commodus, a general sedition broke out in
      the camp, which the officers wanted either power or inclination
      to suppress. Two or three hundred of the most desperate soldiers
      marched at noonday, with arms in their hands and fury in their
      looks, towards the Imperial palace. The gates were thrown open by
      their companions upon guard, and by the domestics of the old
      court, who had already formed a secret conspiracy against the
      life of the too virtuous emperor. On the news of their approach,
      Pertinax, disdaining either flight or concealment, advanced to
      meet his assassins; and recalled to their minds his own
      innocence, and the sanctity of their recent oath. For a few
      moments they stood in silent suspense, ashamed of their atrocious
      design, and awed by the venerable aspect and majestic firmness of
      their sovereign, till at length, the despair of pardon reviving
      their fury, a barbarian of the country of Tongress 55 levelled
      the first blow against Pertinax, who was instantly despatched
      with a multitude of wounds. His head, separated from his body,
      and placed on a lance, was carried in triumph to the Prætorian
      camp, in the sight of a mournful and indignant people, who
      lamented the unworthy fate of that excellent prince, and the
      transient blessings of a reign, the memory of which could serve
      only to aggravate their approaching misfortunes. 56


      55 (return) [ The modern bishopric of Liege. This soldier
      probably belonged to the Batavian horse-guards, who were mostly
      raised in the duchy of Gueldres and the neighborhood, and were
      distinguished by their valor, and by the boldness with which they
      swam their horses across the broadest and most rapid rivers.
      Tacit. Hist. iv. 12 Dion, l. lv p. 797 Lipsius de magnitudine
      Romana, l. i. c. 4.]


      56 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1232. Herodian, l. ii. p. 60.
      Hist. August. p. 58. Victor in Epitom. et in Cæsarib. Eutropius,
      viii. 16.]


      Chapter V: Sale Of The Empire To Didius Julianus.—Part I.


Public Sale Of The Empire To Didius Julianus By The Prætorian
Guards—Clodius Albinus In Britain, Pescennius Niger In Syria, And
Septimius Severus In Pannonia, Declare Against The Murderers Of
Pertinax—Civil Wars And Victory Of Severus Over His Three
Rivals—Relaxation Of Discipline—New Maxims Of Government.


      The power of the sword is more sensibly felt in an extensive
      monarchy, than in a small community. It has been calculated by
      the ablest politicians, that no state, without being soon
      exhausted, can maintain above the hundredth part of its members
      in arms and idleness. But although this relative proportion may
      be uniform, the influence of the army over the rest of the
      society will vary according to the degree of its positive
      strength. The advantages of military science and discipline
      cannot be exerted, unless a proper number of soldiers are united
      into one body, and actuated by one soul. With a handful of men,
      such a union would be ineffectual; with an unwieldy host, it
      would be impracticable; and the powers of the machine would be
      alike destroyed by the extreme minuteness or the excessive weight
      of its springs. To illustrate this observation, we need only
      reflect, that there is no superiority of natural strength,
      artificial weapons, or acquired skill, which could enable one man
      to keep in constant subjection one hundred of his
      fellow-creatures: the tyrant of a single town, or a small
      district, would soon discover that a hundred armed followers were
      a weak defence against ten thousand peasants or citizens; but a
      hundred thousand well-disciplined soldiers will command, with
      despotic sway, ten millions of subjects; and a body of ten or
      fifteen thousand guards will strike terror into the most numerous
      populace that ever crowded the streets of an immense capital.


      The Prætorian bands, whose licentious fury was the first symptom
      and cause of the decline of the Roman empire, scarcely amounted
      to the last-mentioned number. 1 They derived their institution
      from Augustus. That crafty tyrant, sensible that laws might
      color, but that arms alone could maintain, his usurped dominion,
      had gradually formed this powerful body of guards, in constant
      readiness to protect his person, to awe the senate, and either to
      prevent or to crush the first motions of rebellion. He
      distinguished these favored troops by a double pay and superior
      privileges; but, as their formidable aspect would at once have
      alarmed and irritated the Roman people, three cohorts only were
      stationed in the capital, whilst the remainder was dispersed in
      the adjacent towns of Italy. 2 But after fifty years of peace and
      servitude, Tiberius ventured on a decisive measure, which forever
      rivetted the fetters of his country. Under the fair pretences of
      relieving Italy from the heavy burden of military quarters, and
      of introducing a stricter discipline among the guards, he
      assembled them at Rome, in a permanent camp, 3 which was
      fortified with skilful care, 4 and placed on a commanding
      situation. 5


      1 (return) [ They were originally nine or ten thousand men, (for
      Tacitus and son are not agreed upon the subject,) divided into as
      many cohorts. Vitellius increased them to sixteen thousand, and
      as far as we can learn from inscriptions, they never afterwards
      sunk much below that number. See Lipsius de magnitudine Romana,
      i. 4.]


      2 (return) [ Sueton. in August. c. 49.]


      3 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. iv. 2. Sueton. in Tiber. c. 37. Dion
      Cassius, l. lvii. p. 867.]


      4 (return) [ In the civil war between Vitellius and Vespasian,
      the Prætorian camp was attacked and defended with all the
      machines used in the siege of the best fortified cities. Tacit.
      Hist. iii. 84.]


      5 (return) [ Close to the walls of the city, on the broad summit
      of the Quirinal and Viminal hills. See Nardini Roma Antica, p.
      174. Donatus de Roma Antiqua, p. 46. * Note: Not on both these
      hills: neither Donatus nor Nardini justify this position.
      (Whitaker’s Review. p. 13.) At the northern extremity of this
      hill (the Viminal) are some considerable remains of a walled
      enclosure which bears all the appearance of a Roman camp, and
      therefore is generally thought to correspond with the Castra
      Prætoria. Cramer’s Italy 390.—M.]


      Such formidable servants are always necessary, but often fatal to
      the throne of despotism. By thus introducing the Prætorian guards
      as it were into the palace and the senate, the emperors taught
      them to perceive their own strength, and the weakness of the
      civil government; to view the vices of their masters with
      familiar contempt, and to lay aside that reverential awe, which
      distance only, and mystery, can preserve towards an imaginary
      power. In the luxurious idleness of an opulent city, their pride
      was nourished by the sense of their irresistible weight; nor was
      it possible to conceal from them, that the person of the
      sovereign, the authority of the senate, the public treasure, and
      the seat of empire, were all in their hands. To divert the
      Prætorian bands from these dangerous reflections, the firmest and
      best established princes were obliged to mix blandishments with
      commands, rewards with punishments, to flatter their pride,
      indulge their pleasures, connive at their irregularities, and to
      purchase their precarious faith by a liberal donative; which,
      since the elevation of Claudius, was enacted as a legal claim, on
      the accession of every new emperor. 6


      6 (return) [ Claudius, raised by the soldiers to the empire, was
      the first who gave a donative. He gave quina dena, 120l. (Sueton.
      in Claud. c. 10: ) when Marcus, with his colleague Lucius Versus,
      took quiet possession of the throne, he gave vicena, 160l. to
      each of the guards. Hist. August. p. 25, (Dion, l. lxxiii. p.
      1231.) We may form some idea of the amount of these sums, by
      Hadrian’s complaint that the promotion of a Cæsar had cost him
      ter millies, two millions and a half sterling.]


      The advocate of the guards endeavored to justify by arguments the
      power which they asserted by arms; and to maintain that,
      according to the purest principles of the constitution, _their_
      consent was essentially necessary in the appointment of an
      emperor. The election of consuls, of generals, and of
      magistrates, however it had been recently usurped by the senate,
      was the ancient and undoubted right of the Roman people. 7 But
      where was the Roman people to be found? Not surely amongst the
      mixed multitude of slaves and strangers that filled the streets
      of Rome; a servile populace, as devoid of spirit as destitute of
      property. The defenders of the state, selected from the flower of
      the Italian youth, 8 and trained in the exercise of arms and
      virtue, were the genuine representatives of the people, and the
      best entitled to elect the military chief of the republic. These
      assertions, however defective in reason, became unanswerable when
      the fierce Prætorians increased their weight, by throwing, like
      the barbarian conqueror of Rome, their swords into the scale. 9


      7 (return) [ Cicero de Legibus, iii. 3. The first book of Livy,
      and the second of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, show the authority
      of the people, even in the election of the kings.]


      8 (return) [ They were originally recruited in Latium, Etruria,
      and the old colonies, (Tacit. Annal. iv. 5.) The emperor Otho
      compliments their vanity with the flattering titles of Italiæ,
      Alumni, Romana were juventus. Tacit. Hist. i. 84.]


      9 (return) [ In the siege of Rome by the Gauls. See Livy, v. 48.
      Plutarch. in Camill. p. 143.]


      The Prætorians had violated the sanctity of the throne by the
      atrocious murder of Pertinax; they dishonored the majesty of it
      by their subsequent conduct. The camp was without a leader, for
      even the præfect Lætus, who had excited the tempest, prudently
      declined the public indignation. Amidst the wild disorder,
      Sulpicianus, the emperor’s father-in-law, and governor of the
      city, who had been sent to the camp on the first alarm of mutiny,
      was endeavoring to calm the fury of the multitude, when he was
      silenced by the clamorous return of the murderers, bearing on a
      lance the head of Pertinax. Though history has accustomed us to
      observe every principle and every passion yielding to the
      imperious dictates of ambition, it is scarcely credible that, in
      these moments of horror, Sulpicianus should have aspired to
      ascend a throne polluted with the recent blood of so near a
      relation and so excellent a prince. He had already begun to use
      the only effectual argument, and to treat for the Imperial
      dignity; but the more prudent of the Prætorians, apprehensive
      that, in this private contract, they should not obtain a just
      price for so valuable a commodity, ran out upon the ramparts;
      and, with a loud voice, proclaimed that the Roman world was to be
      disposed of to the best bidder by public auction. 10


      10 (return) [ Dion, L. lxxiii. p. 1234. Herodian, l. ii. p. 63.
      Hist. August p. 60. Though the three historians agree that it was
      in fact an auction, Herodian alone affirms that it was proclaimed
      as such by the soldiers.]


      This infamous offer, the most insolent excess of military
      license, diffused a universal grief, shame, and indignation
      throughout the city. It reached at length the ears of Didius
      Julianus, a wealthy senator, who, regardless of the public
      calamities, was indulging himself in the luxury of the table. 11
      His wife and his daughter, his freedmen and his parasites, easily
      convinced him that he deserved the throne, and earnestly conjured
      him to embrace so fortunate an opportunity. The vain old man
      hastened to the Prætorian camp, where Sulpicianus was still in
      treaty with the guards, and began to bid against him from the
      foot of the rampart. The unworthy negotiation was transacted by
      faithful emissaries, who passed alternately from one candidate to
      the other, and acquainted each of them with the offers of his
      rival. Sulpicianus had already promised a donative of five
      thousand drachms (above one hundred and sixty pounds) to each
      soldier; when Julian, eager for the prize, rose at once to the
      sum of six thousand two hundred and fifty drachms, or upwards of
      two hundred pounds sterling. The gates of the camp were instantly
      thrown open to the purchaser; he was declared emperor, and
      received an oath of allegiance from the soldiers, who retained
      humanity enough to stipulate that he should pardon and forget the
      competition of Sulpicianus. 111


      11 (return) [ Spartianus softens the most odious parts of the
      character and elevation of Julian.]


      111 (return) [ One of the principal causes of the preference of
      Julianus by the soldiers, was the dexterty dexterity with which
      he reminded them that Sulpicianus would not fail to revenge on
      them the death of his son-in-law. (See Dion, p. 1234, 1234. c.
      11. Herod. ii. 6.)—W.]


      It was now incumbent on the Prætorians to fulfil the conditions
      of the sale. They placed their new sovereign, whom they served
      and despised, in the centre of their ranks, surrounded him on
      every side with their shields, and conducted him in close order
      of battle through the deserted streets of the city. The senate
      was commanded to assemble; and those who had been the
      distinguished friends of Pertinax, or the personal enemies of
      Julian, found it necessary to affect a more than common share of
      satisfaction at this happy revolution. 12 After Julian had filled
      the senate house with armed soldiers, he expatiated on the
      freedom of his election, his own eminent virtues, and his full
      assurance of the affections of the senate. The obsequious
      assembly congratulated their own and the public felicity; engaged
      their allegiance, and conferred on him all the several branches
      of the Imperial power. 13 From the senate Julian was conducted,
      by the same military procession, to take possession of the
      palace. The first objects that struck his eyes, were the
      abandoned trunk of Pertinax, and the frugal entertainment
      prepared for his supper. The one he viewed with indifference, the
      other with contempt. A magnificent feast was prepared by his
      order, and he amused himself, till a very late hour, with dice,
      and the performances of Pylades, a celebrated dancer. Yet it was
      observed, that after the crowd of flatterers dispersed, and left
      him to darkness, solitude, and terrible reflection, he passed a
      sleepless night; revolving most probably in his mind his own rash
      folly, the fate of his virtuous predecessor, and the doubtful and
      dangerous tenure of an empire which had not been acquired by
      merit, but purchased by money. 14


      12 (return) [ Dion Cassius, at that time prætor, had been a
      personal enemy to Julian, i. lxxiii. p. 1235.]


      13 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 61. We learn from thence one
      curious circumstance, that the new emperor, whatever had been his
      birth, was immediately aggregated to the number of patrician
      families. Note: A new fragment of Dion shows some shrewdness in
      the character of Julian. When the senate voted him a golden
      statue, he preferred one of brass, as more lasting. He “had
      always observed,” he said, “that the statues of former emperors
      were soon destroyed. Those of brass alone remained.” The
      indignant historian adds that he was wrong. The virtue of
      sovereigns alone preserves their images: the brazen statue of
      Julian was broken to pieces at his death. Mai. Fragm. Vatican. p.
      226.—M.]


      14 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1235. Hist. August. p. 61. I
      have endeavored to blend into one consistent story the seeming
      contradictions of the two writers. * Note: The contradiction as
      M. Guizot observed, is irreconcilable. He quotes both passages:
      in one Julianus is represented as a miser, in the other as a
      voluptuary. In the one he refuses to eat till the body of
      Pertinax has been buried; in the other he gluts himself with
      every luxury almost in the sight of his headless remains.—M.]


      He had reason to tremble. On the throne of the world he found
      himself without a friend, and even without an adherent. The
      guards themselves were ashamed of the prince whom their avarice
      had persuaded them to accept; nor was there a citizen who did not
      consider his elevation with horror, as the last insult on the
      Roman name. The nobility, whose conspicuous station, and ample
      possessions, exacted the strictest caution, dissembled their
      sentiments, and met the affected civility of the emperor with
      smiles of complacency and professions of duty. But the people,
      secure in their numbers and obscurity, gave a free vent to their
      passions. The streets and public places of Rome resounded with
      clamors and imprecations. The enraged multitude affronted the
      person of Julian, rejected his liberality, and, conscious of the
      impotence of their own resentment, they called aloud on the
      legions of the frontiers to assert the violated majesty of the
      Roman empire. The public discontent was soon diffused from the
      centre to the frontiers of the empire. The armies of Britain, of
      Syria, and of Illyricum, lamented the death of Pertinax, in whose
      company, or under whose command, they had so often fought and
      conquered. They received with surprise, with indignation, and
      perhaps with envy, the extraordinary intelligence, that the
      Prætorians had disposed of the empire by public auction; and they
      sternly refused to ratify the ignominious bargain. Their
      immediate and unanimous revolt was fatal to Julian, but it was
      fatal at the same time to the public peace, as the generals of
      the respective armies, Clodius Albinus, Pescennius Niger, and
      Septimius Severus, were still more anxious to succeed than to
      revenge the murdered Pertinax. Their forces were exactly
      balanced. Each of them was at the head of three legions, 15 with
      a numerous train of auxiliaries; and however different in their
      characters, they were all soldiers of experience and capacity.


      15 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1235.]


      Clodius Albinus, governor of Britain, surpassed both his
      competitors in the nobility of his extraction, which he derived
      from some of the most illustrious names of the old republic. 16
      But the branch from which he claimed his descent was sunk into
      mean circumstances, and transplanted into a remote province. It
      is difficult to form a just idea of his true character. Under the
      philosophic cloak of austerity, he stands accused of concealing
      most of the vices which degrade human nature. 17 But his accusers
      are those venal writers who adored the fortune of Severus, and
      trampled on the ashes of an unsuccessful rival. Virtue, or the
      appearances of virtue, recommended Albinus to the confidence and
      good opinion of Marcus; and his preserving with the son the same
      interest which he had acquired with the father, is a proof at
      least that he was possessed of a very flexible disposition. The
      favor of a tyrant does not always suppose a want of merit in the
      object of it; he may, without intending it, reward a man of worth
      and ability, or he may find such a man useful to his own service.
      It does not appear that Albinus served the son of Marcus, either
      as the minister of his cruelties, or even as the associate of his
      pleasures. He was employed in a distant honorable command, when
      he received a confidential letter from the emperor, acquainting
      him of the treasonable designs of some discontented generals, and
      authorizing him to declare himself the guardian and successor of
      the throne, by assuming the title and ensigns of Cæsar. 18 The
      governor of Britain wisely declined the dangerous honor, which
      would have marked him for the jealousy, or involved him in the
      approaching ruin, of Commodus. He courted power by nobler, or, at
      least, by more specious arts. On a premature report of the death
      of the emperor, he assembled his troops; and, in an eloquent
      discourse, deplored the inevitable mischiefs of despotism,
      described the happiness and glory which their ancestors had
      enjoyed under the consular government, and declared his firm
      resolution to reinstate the senate and people in their legal
      authority. This popular harangue was answered by the loud
      acclamations of the British legions, and received at Rome with a
      secret murmur of applause. Safe in the possession of his little
      world, and in the command of an army less distinguished indeed
      for discipline than for numbers and valor, 19 Albinus braved the
      menaces of Commodus, maintained towards Pertinax a stately
      ambiguous reserve, and instantly declared against the usurpation
      of Julian. The convulsions of the capital added new weight to his
      sentiments, or rather to his professions of patriotism. A regard
      to decency induced him to decline the lofty titles of Augustus
      and Emperor; and he imitated perhaps the example of Galba, who,
      on a similar occasion, had styled himself the Lieutenant of the
      senate and people. 20


      16 (return) [ The Posthumian and the Ce’onian; the former of whom
      was raised to the consulship in the fifth year after its
      institution.]


      17 (return) [ Spartianus, in his undigested collections, mixes up
      all the virtues and all the vices that enter into the human
      composition, and bestows them on the same object. Such, indeed
      are many of the characters in the Augustan History.]


      18 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 80, 84.]


      19 (return) [ Pertinax, who governed Britain a few years before,
      had been left for dead, in a mutiny of the soldiers. Hist.
      August. p 54. Yet they loved and regretted him; admirantibus eam
      virtutem cui irascebantur.]


      20 (return) [ Sueton. in Galb. c. 10.]


      Personal merit alone had raised Pescennius Niger, from an obscure
      birth and station, to the government of Syria; a lucrative and
      important command, which in times of civil confusion gave him a
      near prospect of the throne. Yet his parts seem to have been
      better suited to the second than to the first rank; he was an
      unequal rival, though he might have approved himself an excellent
      lieutenant, to Severus, who afterwards displayed the greatness of
      his mind by adopting several useful institutions from a
      vanquished enemy. 21 In his government Niger acquired the esteem
      of the soldiers and the love of the provincials. His rigid
      discipline fortified the valor and confirmed the obedience of the
      former, whilst the voluptuous Syrians were less delighted with
      the mild firmness of his administration, than with the affability
      of his manners, and the apparent pleasure with which he attended
      their frequent and pompous festivals. 22 As soon as the
      intelligence of the atrocious murder of Pertinax had reached
      Antioch, the wishes of Asia invited Niger to assume the Imperial
      purple and revenge his death. The legions of the eastern frontier
      embraced his cause; the opulent but unarmed provinces, from the
      frontiers of Æthiopia 23 to the Hadriatic, cheerfully submitted
      to his power; and the kings beyond the Tigris and the Euphrates
      congratulated his election, and offered him their homage and
      services. The mind of Niger was not capable of receiving this
      sudden tide of fortune: he flattered himself that his accession
      would be undisturbed by competition and unstained by civil blood;
      and whilst he enjoyed the vain pomp of triumph, he neglected to
      secure the means of victory. Instead of entering into an
      effectual negotiation with the powerful armies of the West, whose
      resolution might decide, or at least must balance, the mighty
      contest; instead of advancing without delay towards Rome and
      Italy, where his presence was impatiently expected, 24 Niger
      trifled away in the luxury of Antioch those irretrievable moments
      which were diligently improved by the decisive activity of
      Severus. 25


      21 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 76.]


      22 (return) [ Herod. l. ii. p. 68. The Chronicle of John Malala,
      of Antioch, shows the zealous attachment of his countrymen to
      these festivals, which at once gratified their superstition, and
      their love of pleasure.]


      23 (return) [ A king of Thebes, in Egypt, is mentioned, in the
      Augustan History, as an ally, and, indeed, as a personal friend
      of Niger. If Spartianus is not, as I strongly suspect, mistaken,
      he has brought to light a dynasty of tributary princes totally
      unknown to history.]


      24 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1238. Herod. l. ii. p. 67. A
      verse in every one’s mouth at that time, seems to express the
      general opinion of the three rivals; Optimus est _Niger_,
      [_Fuscus_, which preserves the quantity.—M.] bonus _Afer_,
      pessimus _Albus_. Hist. August. p. 75.]


      25 (return) [ Herodian, l. ii. p. 71.]


      The country of Pannonia and Dalmatia, which occupied the space
      between the Danube and the Hadriatic, was one of the last and
      most difficult conquests of the Romans. In the defence of
      national freedom, two hundred thousand of these barbarians had
      once appeared in the field, alarmed the declining age of
      Augustus, and exercised the vigilant prudence of Tiberius at the
      head of the collected force of the empire. 26 The Pannonians
      yielded at length to the arms and institutions of Rome. Their
      recent subjection, however, the neighborhood, and even the
      mixture, of the unconquered tribes, and perhaps the climate,
      adapted, as it has been observed, to the production of great
      bodies and slow minds, 27 all contributed to preserve some
      remains of their original ferocity, and under the tame and
      uniform countenance of Roman provincials, the hardy features of
      the natives were still to be discerned. Their warlike youth
      afforded an inexhaustible supply of recruits to the legions
      stationed on the banks of the Danube, and which, from a perpetual
      warfare against the Germans and Sarmazans, were deservedly
      esteemed the best troops in the service.


      26 (return) [ See an account of that memorable war in Velleius
      Paterculus, is 110, &c., who served in the army of Tiberius.]


      27 (return) [ Such is the reflection of Herodian, l. ii. p. 74.
      Will the modern Austrians allow the influence?]


      The Pannonian army was at this time commanded by Septimius
      Severus, a native of Africa, who, in the gradual ascent of
      private honors, had concealed his daring ambition, which was
      never diverted from its steady course by the allurements of
      pleasure, the apprehension of danger, or the feelings of
      humanity. 28 On the first news of the murder of Pertinax, he
      assembled his troops, painted in the most lively colors the
      crime, the insolence, and the weakness of the Prætorian guards,
      and animated the legions to arms and to revenge. He concluded
      (and the peroration was thought extremely eloquent) with
      promising every soldier about four hundred pounds; an honorable
      donative, double in value to the infamous bribe with which Julian
      had purchased the empire. 29 The acclamations of the army
      immediately saluted Severus with the names of Augustus, Pertinax,
      and Emperor; and he thus attained the lofty station to which he
      was invited, by conscious merit and a long train of dreams and
      omens, the fruitful offsprings either of his superstition or
      policy. 30


      28 (return) [ In the letter to Albinus, already mentioned,
      Commodus accuses Severus, as one of the ambitious generals who
      censured his conduct, and wished to occupy his place. Hist.
      August. p. 80.]


      29 (return) [ Pannonia was too poor to supply such a sum. It was
      probably promised in the camp, and paid at Rome, after the
      victory. In fixing the sum, I have adopted the conjecture of
      Casaubon. See Hist. August. p. 66. Comment. p. 115.]


      30 (return) [ Herodian, l. ii. p. 78. Severus was declared
      emperor on the banks of the Danube, either at Carnuntum,
      according to Spartianus, (Hist. August. p. 65,) or else at
      Sabaria, according to Victor. Mr. Hume, in supposing that the
      birth and dignity of Severus were too much inferior to the
      Imperial crown, and that he marched into Italy as general only,
      has not considered this transaction with his usual accuracy,
      (Essay on the original contract.) * Note: Carnuntum, opposite to
      the mouth of the Morava: its position is doubtful, either
      Petronel or Haimburg. A little intermediate village seems to
      indicate by its name (Altenburg) the site of an old town.
      D’Anville Geogr. Anc. Sabaria, now Sarvar.—G. Compare note
      37.—M.]


      The new candidate for empire saw and improved the peculiar
      advantage of his situation. His province extended to the Julian
      Alps, which gave an easy access into Italy; and he remembered the
      saying of Augustus, that a Pannonian army might in ten days
      appear in sight of Rome. 31 By a celerity proportioned to the
      greatness of the occasion, he might reasonably hope to revenge
      Pertinax, punish Julian, and receive the homage of the senate and
      people, as their lawful emperor, before his competitors,
      separated from Italy by an immense tract of sea and land, were
      apprised of his success, or even of his election. During the
      whole expedition, he scarcely allowed himself any moments for
      sleep or food; marching on foot, and in complete armor, at the
      head of his columns, he insinuated himself into the confidence
      and affection of his troops, pressed their diligence, revived
      their spirits, animated their hopes, and was well satisfied to
      share the hardships of the meanest soldier, whilst he kept in
      view the infinite superiority of his reward.


      31 (return) [ Velleius Paterculus, l. ii. c. 3. We must reckon
      the march from the nearest verge of Pannonia, and extend the
      sight of the city as far as two hundred miles.]


      The wretched Julian had expected, and thought himself prepared,
      to dispute the empire with the governor of Syria; but in the
      invincible and rapid approach of the Pannonian legions, he saw
      his inevitable ruin. The hasty arrival of every messenger
      increased his just apprehensions. He was successively informed,
      that Severus had passed the Alps; that the Italian cities,
      unwilling or unable to oppose his progress, had received him with
      the warmest professions of joy and duty; that the important place
      of Ravenna had surrendered without resistance, and that the
      Hadriatic fleet was in the hands of the conqueror. The enemy was
      now within two hundred and fifty miles of Rome; and every moment
      diminished the narrow span of life and empire allotted to Julian.


      He attempted, however, to prevent, or at least to protract, his
      ruin. He implored the venal faith of the Prætorians, filled the
      city with unavailing preparations for war, drew lines round the
      suburbs, and even strengthened the fortifications of the palace;
      as if those last intrenchments could be defended, without hope of
      relief, against a victorious invader. Fear and shame prevented
      the guards from deserting his standard; but they trembled at the
      name of the Pannonian legions, commanded by an experienced
      general, and accustomed to vanquish the barbarians on the frozen
      Danube. 32 They quitted, with a sigh, the pleasures of the baths
      and theatres, to put on arms, whose use they had almost
      forgotten, and beneath the weight of which they were oppressed.
      The unpractised elephants, whose uncouth appearance, it was
      hoped, would strike terror into the army of the north, threw
      their unskilful riders; and the awkward evolutions of the
      marines, drawn from the fleet of Misenum, were an object of
      ridicule to the populace; whilst the senate enjoyed, with secret
      pleasure, the distress and weakness of the usurper. 33


      32 (return) [ This is not a puerile figure of rhetoric, but an
      allusion to a real fact recorded by Dion, l. lxxi. p. 1181. It
      probably happened more than once.]


      33 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1233. Herodian, l. ii. p. 81.
      There is no surer proof of the military skill of the Romans, than
      their first surmounting the idle terror, and afterwards
      disdaining the dangerous use, of elephants in war. Note: These
      elephants were kept for processions, perhaps for the games. Se
      Herod. in loc.—M.]


      Every motion of Julian betrayed his trembling perplexity. He
      insisted that Severus should be declared a public enemy by the
      senate. He entreated that the Pannonian general might be
      associated to the empire. He sent public ambassadors of consular
      rank to negotiate with his rival; he despatched private assassins
      to take away his life. He designed that the Vestal virgins, and
      all the colleges of priests, in their sacerdotal habits, and
      bearing before them the sacred pledges of the Roman religion,
      should advance in solemn procession to meet the Pannonian
      legions; and, at the same time, he vainly tried to interrogate,
      or to appease, the fates, by magic ceremonies and unlawful
      sacrifices. 34


      34 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 62, 63. * Note: Quæ ad speculum
      dicunt fieri in quo pueri præligatis oculis, incantate...,
      respicere dicuntur. * * * Tuncque puer vidisse dicitur et
      adventun Severi et Juliani decessionem. This seems to have been a
      practice somewhat similar to that of which our recent Egyptian
      travellers relate such extraordinary circumstances. See also
      Apulius, Orat. de Magia.—M.]


      Chapter V: Sale Of The Empire To Didius Julianus.—Part II.


      Severus, who dreaded neither his arms nor his enchantments,
      guarded himself from the only danger of secret conspiracy, by the
      faithful attendance of six hundred chosen men, who never quitted
      his person or their cuirasses, either by night or by day, during
      the whole march. Advancing with a steady and rapid course, he
      passed, without difficulty, the defiles of the Apennine, received
      into his party the troops and ambassadors sent to retard his
      progress, and made a short halt at Interamnia, about seventy
      miles from Rome. His victory was already secure, but the despair
      of the Prætorians might have rendered it bloody; and Severus had
      the laudable ambition of ascending the throne without drawing the
      sword. 35 His emissaries, dispersed in the capital, assured the
      guards, that provided they would abandon their worthless prince,
      and the perpetrators of the murder of Pertinax, to the justice of
      the conqueror, he would no longer consider that melancholy event
      as the act of the whole body. The faithless Prætorians, whose
      resistance was supported only by sullen obstinacy, gladly
      complied with the easy conditions, seized the greatest part of
      the assassins, and signified to the senate, that they no longer
      defended the cause of Julian. That assembly, convoked by the
      consul, unanimously acknowledged Severus as lawful emperor,
      decreed divine honors to Pertinax, and pronounced a sentence of
      deposition and death against his unfortunate successor. Julian
      was conducted into a private apartment of the baths of the
      palace, and beheaded as a common criminal, after having
      purchased, with an immense treasure, an anxious and precarious
      reign of only sixty-six days. 36 The almost incredible expedition
      of Severus, who, in so short a space of time, conducted a
      numerous army from the banks of the Danube to those of the Tyber,
      proves at once the plenty of provisions produced by agriculture
      and commerce, the goodness of the roads, the discipline of the
      legions, and the indolent, subdued temper of the provinces. 37


      35 (return) [ Victor and Eutropius, viii. 17, mention a combat
      near the Milvian bridge, the Ponte Molle, unknown to the better
      and more ancient writers.]


      36 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxiii. p. 1240. Herodian, l. ii. p. 83.
      Hist. August. p. 63.]


      37 (return) [ From these sixty-six days, we must first deduct
      sixteen, as Pertinax was murdered on the 28th of March, and
      Severus most probably elected on the 13th of April, (see Hist.
      August. p. 65, and Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iii. p.
      393, note 7.) We cannot allow less than ten days after his
      election, to put a numerous army in motion. Forty days remain for
      this rapid march; and as we may compute about eight hundred miles
      from Rome to the neighborhood of Vienna, the army of Severus
      marched twenty miles every day, without halt or intermission.]


      The first cares of Severus were bestowed on two measures, the one
      dictated by policy, the other by decency; the revenge, and the
      honors, due to the memory of Pertinax. Before the new emperor
      entered Rome, he issued his commands to the Prætorian guards,
      directing them to wait his arrival on a large plain near the
      city, without arms, but in the habits of ceremony, in which they
      were accustomed to attend their sovereign. He was obeyed by those
      haughty troops, whose contrition was the effect of their just
      terrors. A chosen part of the Illyrian army encompassed them with
      levelled spears. Incapable of flight or resistance, they expected
      their fate in silent consternation. Severus mounted the tribunal,
      sternly reproached them with perfidy and cowardice, dismissed
      them with ignominy from the trust which they had betrayed,
      despoiled them of their splendid ornaments, and banished them, on
      pain of death, to the distance of a hundred miles from the
      capital. During the transaction, another detachment had been sent
      to seize their arms, occupy their camp, and prevent the hasty
      consequences of their despair. 38


      38 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxiv. p. 1241. Herodian, l. ii. p. 84.]
      The funeral and consecration of Pertinax was next solemnized with
      every circumstance of sad magnificence. 39 The senate, with a
      melancholy pleasure, performed the last rites to that excellent
      prince, whom they had loved, and still regretted. The concern of
      his successor was probably less sincere; he esteemed the virtues
      of Pertinax, but those virtues would forever have confined his
      ambition to a private station. Severus pronounced his funeral
      oration with studied eloquence, inward satisfaction, and
      well-acted sorrow; and by this pious regard to his memory,
      convinced the credulous multitude, that _he alone_ was worthy to
      supply his place. Sensible, however, that arms, not ceremonies,
      must assert his claim to the empire, he left Rome at the end of
      thirty days, and without suffering himself to be elated by this
      easy victory, prepared to encounter his more formidable rivals.


      39 (return) [ Dion, (l. lxxiv. p. 1244,) who assisted at the
      ceremony as a senator, gives a most pompous description of it.]


      The uncommon abilities and fortune of Severus have induced an
      elegant historian to compare him with the first and greatest of
      the Cæsars. 40 The parallel is, at least, imperfect. Where shall
      we find, in the character of Severus, the commanding superiority
      of soul, the generous clemency, and the various genius, which
      could reconcile and unite the love of pleasure, the thirst of
      knowledge, and the fire of ambition? 41 In one instance only,
      they may be compared, with some degree of propriety, in the
      celerity of their motions, and their civil victories. In less
      than four years, 42 Severus subdued the riches of the East, and
      the valor of the West. He vanquished two competitors of
      reputation and ability, and defeated numerous armies, provided
      with weapons and discipline equal to his own. In that age, the
      art of fortification, and the principles of tactics, were well
      understood by all the Roman generals; and the constant
      superiority of Severus was that of an artist, who uses the same
      instruments with more skill and industry than his rivals. I shall
      not, however, enter into a minute narrative of these military
      operations; but as the two civil wars against Niger and against
      Albinus were almost the same in their conduct, event, and
      consequences, I shall collect into one point of view the most
      striking circumstances, tending to develop the character of the
      conqueror and the state of the empire.


      40 (return) [ Herodian, l. iii. p. 112]


      41 (return) [ Though it is not, most assuredly, the intention of
      Lucan to exalt the character of Cæsar, yet the idea he gives of
      that hero, in the tenth book of the Pharsalia, where he describes
      him, at the same time, making love to Cleopatra, sustaining a
      siege against the power of Egypt, and conversing with the sages
      of the country, is, in reality, the noblest panegyric. * Note:
      Lord Byron wrote, no doubt, from a reminiscence of that
      passage—“It is possible to be a very great man, and to be still
      very inferior to Julius Cæsar, the most complete character, so
      Lord Bacon thought, of all antiquity. Nature seems incapable of
      such extraordinary combinations as composed his versatile
      capacity, which was the wonder even of the Romans themselves. The
      first general; the only triumphant politician; inferior to none
      in point of eloquence; comparable to any in the attainments of
      wisdom, in an age made up of the greatest commanders, statesmen,
      orators, and philosophers, that ever appeared in the world; an
      author who composed a perfect specimen of military annals in his
      travelling carriage; at one time in a controversy with Cato, at
      another writing a treatise on punuing, and collecting a set of
      good sayings; fighting and making love at the same moment, and
      willing to abandon both his empire and his mistress for a sight
      of the fountains of the Nile. Such did Julius Cæsar appear to his
      contemporaries, and to those of the subsequent ages who were the
      most inclined to deplore and execrate his fatal genius.” Note 47
      to Canto iv. of Childe Harold.—M.]


      42 (return) [ Reckoning from his election, April 13, 193, to the
      death of Albinus, February 19, 197. See Tillemont’s Chronology.]


      Falsehood and insincerity, unsuitable as they seem to the dignity
      of public transactions, offend us with a less degrading idea of
      meanness, than when they are found in the intercourse of private
      life. In the latter, they discover a want of courage; in the
      other, only a defect of power: and, as it is impossible for the
      most able statesmen to subdue millions of followers and enemies
      by their own personal strength, the world, under the name of
      policy, seems to have granted them a very liberal indulgence of
      craft and dissimulation. Yet the arts of Severus cannot be
      justified by the most ample privileges of state reason. He
      promised only to betray, he flattered only to ruin; and however
      he might occasionally bind himself by oaths and treaties, his
      conscience, obsequious to his interest, always released him from
      the inconvenient obligation. 43


      43 (return) [ Herodian, l. ii. p. 85.]


      If his two competitors, reconciled by their common danger, had
      advanced upon him without delay, perhaps Severus would have sunk
      under their united effort. Had they even attacked him, at the
      same time, with separate views and separate armies, the contest
      might have been long and doubtful. But they fell, singly and
      successively, an easy prey to the arts as well as arms of their
      subtle enemy, lulled into security by the moderation of his
      professions, and overwhelmed by the rapidity of his action. He
      first marched against Niger, whose reputation and power he the
      most dreaded: but he declined any hostile declarations,
      suppressed the name of his antagonist, and only signified to the
      senate and people his intention of regulating the eastern
      provinces. In private, he spoke of Niger, his old friend and
      intended successor, 44 with the most affectionate regard, and
      highly applauded his generous design of revenging the murder of
      Pertinax. To punish the vile usurper of the throne, was the duty
      of every Roman general. To persevere in arms, and to resist a
      lawful emperor, acknowledged by the senate, would alone render
      him criminal. 45 The sons of Niger had fallen into his hands
      among the children of the provincial governors, detained at Rome
      as pledges for the loyalty of their parents. 46 As long as the
      power of Niger inspired terror, or even respect, they were
      educated with the most tender care, with the children of Severus
      himself; but they were soon involved in their father’s ruin, and
      removed first by exile, and afterwards by death, from the eye of
      public compassion. 47


      44 (return) [ Whilst Severus was very dangerously ill, it was
      industriously given out, that he intended to appoint Niger and
      Albinus his successors. As he could not be sincere with respect
      to both, he might not be so with regard to either. Yet Severus
      carried his hypocrisy so far, as to profess that intention in the
      memoirs of his own life.]


      45 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 65.]


      46 (return) [ This practice, invented by Commodus, proved very
      useful to Severus. He found at Rome the children of many of the
      principal adherents of his rivals; and he employed them more than
      once to intimidate, or seduce, the parents.]


      47 (return) [ Herodian, l. iii. p. 95. Hist. August. p. 67, 68.]


      Whilst Severus was engaged in his eastern war, he had reason to
      apprehend that the governor of Britain might pass the sea and the
      Alps, occupy the vacant seat of empire, and oppose his return
      with the authority of the senate and the forces of the West. The
      ambiguous conduct of Albinus, in not assuming the Imperial title,
      left room for negotiation. Forgetting, at once, his professions
      of patriotism, and the jealousy of sovereign power, he accepted
      the precarious rank of Cæsar, as a reward for his fatal
      neutrality. Till the first contest was decided, Severus treated
      the man, whom he had doomed to destruction, with every mark of
      esteem and regard. Even in the letter, in which he announced his
      victory over Niger, he styles Albinus the brother of his soul and
      empire, sends him the affectionate salutations of his wife Julia,
      and his young family, and entreats him to preserve the armies and
      the republic faithful to their common interest. The messengers
      charged with this letter were instructed to accost the Cæsar with
      respect, to desire a private audience, and to plunge their
      daggers into his heart. 48 The conspiracy was discovered, and the
      too credulous Albinus, at length, passed over to the continent,
      and prepared for an unequal contest with his rival, who rushed
      upon him at the head of a veteran and victorious army.


      48 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 84. Spartianus has inserted this
      curious letter at full length.]


      The military labors of Severus seem inadequate to the importance
      of his conquests. Two engagements, 481 the one near the
      Hellespont, the other in the narrow defiles of Cilicia, decided
      the fate of his Syrian competitor; and the troops of Europe
      asserted their usual ascendant over the effeminate natives of
      Asia. 49 The battle of Lyons, where one hundred and fifty
      thousand Romans 50 were engaged, was equally fatal to Albinus.
      The valor of the British army maintained, indeed, a sharp and
      doubtful contest, with the hardy discipline of the Illyrian
      legions. The fame and person of Severus appeared, during a few
      moments, irrecoverably lost, till that warlike prince rallied his
      fainting troops, and led them on to a decisive victory. 51 The
      war was finished by that memorable day. 511


      481 (return) [ There were three actions; one near Cyzicus, on the
      Hellespont, one near Nice, in Bithynia, the third near the Issus,
      in Cilicia, where Alexander conquered Darius. (Dion, lxiv. c. 6.
      Herodian, iii. 2, 4.)—W Herodian represents the second battle as
      of less importance than Dion—M.]


      49 (return) [ Consult the third book of Herodian, and the
      seventy-fourth book of Dion Cassius.]


      50 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxv. p. 1260.]


      51 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxv. p. 1261. Herodian, l. iii. p. 110.
      Hist. August. p. 68. The battle was fought in the plain of
      Trevoux, three or four leagues from Lyons. See Tillemont, tom.
      iii. p. 406, note 18.]


      511 (return) [ According to Herodian, it was his lieutenant Lætus
      who led back the troops to the battle, and gained the day, which
      Severus had almost lost. Dion also attributes to Lætus a great
      share in the victory. Severus afterwards put him to death, either
      from fear or jealousy.—W. and G. Wenck and M. Guizot have not
      given the real statement of Herodian or of Dion. According to the
      former, Lætus appeared with his own army entire, which he was
      suspected of having designedly kept disengaged when the battle
      was still doudtful, or rather after the rout of severus. Dion
      says that he did not move till Severus had won the victory.—M.]


      The civil wars of modern Europe have been distinguished, not only
      by the fierce animosity, but likewise by the obstinate
      perseverance, of the contending factions. They have generally
      been justified by some principle, or, at least, colored by some
      pretext, of religion, freedom, or loyalty. The leaders were
      nobles of independent property and hereditary influence. The
      troops fought like men interested in the decision of the quarrel;
      and as military spirit and party zeal were strongly diffused
      throughout the whole community, a vanquished chief was
      immediately supplied with new adherents, eager to shed their
      blood in the same cause. But the Romans, after the fall of the
      republic, combated only for the choice of masters. Under the
      standard of a popular candidate for empire, a few enlisted from
      affection, some from fear, many from interest, none from
      principle. The legions, uninflamed by party zeal, were allured
      into civil war by liberal donatives, and still more liberal
      promises. A defeat, by disabling the chief from the performance
      of his engagements, dissolved the mercenary allegiance of his
      followers, and left them to consult their own safety by a timely
      desertion of an unsuccessful cause. It was of little moment to
      the provinces, under whose name they were oppressed or governed;
      they were driven by the impulsion of the present power, and as
      soon as that power yielded to a superior force, they hastened to
      implore the clemency of the conqueror, who, as he had an immense
      debt to discharge, was obliged to sacrifice the most guilty
      countries to the avarice of his soldiers. In the vast extent of
      the Roman empire, there were few fortified cities capable of
      protecting a routed army; nor was there any person, or family, or
      order of men, whose natural interest, unsupported by the powers
      of government, was capable of restoring the cause of a sinking
      party. 52


      52 (return) [ Montesquieu, Considerations sur la Grandeur et la
      Decadence des Romains, c. xiii.]


      Yet, in the contest between Niger and Severus, a single city
      deserves an honorable exception. As Byzantium was one of the
      greatest passages from Europe into Asia, it had been provided
      with a strong garrison, and a fleet of five hundred vessels was
      anchored in the harbor. 53 The impetuosity of Severus
      disappointed this prudent scheme of defence; he left to his
      generals the siege of Byzantium, forced the less guarded passage
      of the Hellespont, and, impatient of a meaner enemy, pressed
      forward to encounter his rival. Byzantium, attacked by a numerous
      and increasing army, and afterwards by the whole naval power of
      the empire, sustained a siege of three years, and remained
      faithful to the name and memory of Niger. The citizens and
      soldiers (we know not from what cause) were animated with equal
      fury; several of the principal officers of Niger, who despaired
      of, or who disdained, a pardon, had thrown themselves into this
      last refuge: the fortifications were esteemed impregnable, and,
      in the defence of the place, a celebrated engineer displayed all
      the mechanic powers known to the ancients. 54 Byzantium, at
      length, surrendered to famine. The magistrates and soldiers were
      put to the sword, the walls demolished, the privileges
      suppressed, and the destined capital of the East subsisted only
      as an open village, subject to the insulting jurisdiction of
      Perinthus. The historian Dion, who had admired the flourishing,
      and lamented the desolate, state of Byzantium, accused the
      revenge of Severus, for depriving the Roman people of the
      strongest bulwark against the barbarians of Pontus and Asia 55
      The truth of this observation was but too well justified in the
      succeeding age, when the Gothic fleets covered the Euxine, and
      passed through the undefined Bosphorus into the centre of the
      Mediterranean.


      53 (return) [ Most of these, as may be supposed, were small open
      vessels; some, however, were galleys of two, and a few of three
      ranks of oars.]


      54 (return) [The engineer’s name was Priscus. His skill saved his
      life, and he was taken into the service of the conqueror. For the
      particular facts of the siege, consult Dion Cassius (l. lxxv. p.
      1251) and Herodian, (l. iii. p. 95;) for the theory of it, the
      fanciful chevalier de Folard may be looked into. See Polybe, tom.
      i. p. 76.]


      55 (return) [ Notwithstanding the authority of Spartianus, and
      some modern Greeks, we may be assured, from Dion and Herodian,
      that Byzantium, many years after the death of Severus, lay in
      ruins. There is no contradiction between the relation of Dion and
      that of Spartianus and the modern Greeks. Dion does not say that
      Severus destroyed Byzantium, but that he deprived it of its
      franchises and privileges, stripped the inhabitants of their
      property, razed the fortifications, and subjected the city to the
      jurisdiction of Perinthus. Therefore, when Spartian, Suidas,
      Cedrenus, say that Severus and his son Antoninus restored to
      Byzantium its rights and franchises, ordered temples to be built,
      &c., this is easily reconciled with the relation of Dion. Perhaps
      the latter mentioned it in some of the fragments of his history
      which have been lost. As to Herodian, his expressions are
      evidently exaggerated, and he has been guilty of so many
      inaccuracies in the history of Severus, that we have a right to
      suppose one in this passage.—G. from W Wenck and M. Guizot have
      omitted to cite Zosimus, who mentions a particular portico built
      by Severus, and called, apparently, by his name. Zosim. Hist. ii.
      c. xxx. p. 151, 153, edit Heyne.—M.]


      Both Niger and Albinus were discovered and put to death in their
      flight from the field of battle. Their fate excited neither
      surprise nor compassion. They had staked their lives against the
      chance of empire, and suffered what they would have inflicted;
      nor did Severus claim the arrogant superiority of suffering his
      rivals to live in a private station. But his unforgiving temper,
      stimulated by avarice, indulged a spirit of revenge, where there
      was no room for apprehension. The most considerable of the
      provincials, who, without any dislike to the fortunate candidate,
      had obeyed the governor under whose authority they were
      accidentally placed, were punished by death, exile, and
      especially by the confiscation of their estates. Many cities of
      the East were stripped of their ancient honors, and obliged to
      pay, into the treasury of Severus, four times the amount of the
      sums contributed by them for the service of Niger. 56


      56 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxiv. p. 1250.]


      Till the final decision of the war, the cruelty of Severus was,
      in some measure, restrained by the uncertainty of the event, and
      his pretended reverence for the senate. The head of Albinus,
      accompanied with a menacing letter, announced to the Romans that
      he was resolved to spare none of the adherents of his unfortunate
      competitors. He was irritated by the just auspicion that he had
      never possessed the affections of the senate, and he concealed
      his old malevolence under the recent discovery of some
      treasonable correspondences. Thirty-five senators, however,
      accused of having favored the party of Albinus, he freely
      pardoned, and, by his subsequent behavior, endeavored to convince
      them, that he had forgotten, as well as forgiven, their supposed
      offences. But, at the same time, he condemned forty-one 57 other
      senators, whose names history has recorded; their wives,
      children, and clients attended them in death, 571 and the noblest
      provincials of Spain and Gaul were involved in the same ruin. 572
      Such rigid justice—for so he termed it—was, in the opinion of
      Severus, the only conduct capable of insuring peace to the people
      or stability to the prince; and he condescended slightly to
      lament, that to be mild, it was necessary that he should first be
      cruel. 58


      57 (return) [ Dion, (l. lxxv. p. 1264;) only twenty-nine senators
      are mentioned by him, but forty-one are named in the Augustan
      History, p. 69, among whom were six of the name of Pescennius.
      Herodian (l. iii. p. 115) speaks in general of the cruelties of
      Severus.]


      571 (return) [ Wenck denies that there is any authority for this
      massacre of the wives of the senators. He adds, that only the
      children and relatives of Niger and Albinus were put to death.
      This is true of the family of Albinus, whose bodies were thrown
      into the Rhone; those of Niger, according to Lampridius, were
      sent into exile, but afterwards put to death. Among the partisans
      of Albinus who were put to death were many women of rank, multæ
      fœminæ illustres. Lamprid. in Sever.—M.]


      572 (return) [ A new fragment of Dion describes the state of Rome
      during this contest. All pretended to be on the side of Severus;
      but their secret sentiments were often betrayed by a change of
      countenance on the arrival of some sudden report. Some were
      detected by overacting their loyalty, Mai. Fragm. Vatican. p. 227
      Severus told the senate he would rather have their hearts than
      their votes.—Ibid.—M.]


      58 (return) [ Aurelius Victor.]


      The true interest of an absolute monarch generally coincides with
      that of his people. Their numbers, their wealth, their order, and
      their security, are the best and only foundations of his real
      greatness; and were he totally devoid of virtue, prudence might
      supply its place, and would dictate the same rule of conduct.
      Severus considered the Roman empire as his property, and had no
      sooner secured the possession, than he bestowed his care on the
      cultivation and improvement of so valuable an acquisition.
      Salutary laws, executed with inflexible firmness, soon corrected
      most of the abuses with which, since the death of Marcus, every
      part of the government had been infected. In the administration
      of justice, the judgments of the emperor were characterized by
      attention, discernment, and impartiality; and whenever he
      deviated from the strict line of equity, it was generally in
      favor of the poor and oppressed; not so much indeed from any
      sense of humanity, as from the natural propensity of a despot to
      humble the pride of greatness, and to sink all his subjects to
      the same common level of absolute dependence. His expensive taste
      for building, magnificent shows, and above all a constant and
      liberal distribution of corn and provisions, were the surest
      means of captivating the affection of the Roman people. 59 The
      misfortunes of civil discord were obliterated. The calm of peace
      and prosperity was once more experienced in the provinces; and
      many cities, restored by the munificence of Severus, assumed the
      title of his colonies, and attested by public monuments their
      gratitude and felicity. 60 The fame of the Roman arms was revived
      by that warlike and successful emperor, 61 and he boasted, with a
      just pride, that, having received the empire oppressed with
      foreign and domestic wars, he left it established in profound,
      universal, and honorable peace. 62


      59 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1272. Hist. August. p. 67.
      Severus celebrated the secular games with extraordinary
      magnificence, and he left in the public granaries a provision of
      corn for seven years, at the rate of 75,000 modii, or about 2500
      quarters per day. I am persuaded that the granaries of Severus
      were supplied for a long term, but I am not less persuaded, that
      policy on one hand, and admiration on the other, magnified the
      hoard far beyond its true contents.]


      60 (return) [ See Spanheim’s treatise of ancient medals, the
      inscriptions, and our learned travellers Spon and Wheeler, Shaw,
      Pocock, &c, who, in Africa, Greece, and Asia, have found more
      monuments of Severus than of any other Roman emperor whatsoever.]


      61 (return) [ He carried his victorious arms to Seleucia and
      Ctesiphon, the capitals of the Parthian monarchy. I shall have
      occasion to mention this war in its proper place.]


      62 (return) [ Etiam in Britannis, was his own just and emphatic
      expression Hist. August. 73.]


      Although the wounds of civil war appeared completely healed, its
      mortal poison still lurked in the vitals of the constitution.
      Severus possessed a considerable share of vigor and ability; but
      the daring soul of the first Cæsar, or the deep policy of
      Augustus, were scarcely equal to the task of curbing the
      insolence of the victorious legions. By gratitude, by misguided
      policy, by seeming necessity, Severus was reduced to relax the
      nerves of discipline. 63 The vanity of his soldiers was flattered
      with the honor of wearing gold rings; their ease was indulged in
      the permission of living with their wives in the idleness of
      quarters. He increased their pay beyond the example of former
      times, and taught them to expect, and soon to claim,
      extraordinary donatives on every public occasion of danger or
      festivity. Elated by success, enervated by luxury, and raised
      above the level of subjects by their dangerous privileges, 64
      they soon became incapable of military fatigue, oppressive to the
      country, and impatient of a just subordination. Their officers
      asserted the superiority of rank by a more profuse and elegant
      luxury. There is still extant a letter of Severus, lamenting the
      licentious stage of the army, 641 and exhorting one of his
      generals to begin the necessary reformation from the tribunes
      themselves; since, as he justly observes, the officer who has
      forfeited the esteem, will never command the obedience, of his
      soldiers. 65 Had the emperor pursued the train of reflection, he
      would have discovered, that the primary cause of this general
      corruption might be ascribed, not indeed to the example, but to
      the pernicious indulgence, however, of the commander-in-chief.


      63 (return) [ Herodian, l. iii. p. 115. Hist. August. p. 68.]


      64 (return) [ Upon the insolence and privileges of the soldier,
      the 16th satire, falsely ascribed to Juvenal, may be consulted;
      the style and circumstances of it would induce me to believe,
      that it was composed under the reign of Severus, or that of his
      son.]


      641 (return) [ Not of the army, but of the troops in Gaul. The
      contents of this letter seem to prove that Severus was really
      anxious to restore discipline Herodian is the only historian who
      accuses him of being the first cause of its relaxation.—G. from W
      Spartian mentions his increase of the pays.—M.]


      65 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 73.]


      The Prætorians, who murdered their emperor and sold the empire,
      had received the just punishment of their treason; but the
      necessary, though dangerous, institution of guards was soon
      restored on a new model by Severus, and increased to four times
      the ancient number. 66 Formerly these troops had been recruited
      in Italy; and as the adjacent provinces gradually imbibed the
      softer manners of Rome, the levies were extended to Macedonia,
      Noricum, and Spain. In the room of these elegant troops, better
      adapted to the pomp of courts than to the uses of war, it was
      established by Severus, that from all the legions of the
      frontiers, the soldiers most distinguished for strength, valor,
      and fidelity, should be occasionally draughted; and promoted, as
      an honor and reward, into the more eligible service of the
      guards. 67 By this new institution, the Italian youth were
      diverted from the exercise of arms, and the capital was terrified
      by the strange aspect and manners of a multitude of barbarians.
      But Severus flattered himself, that the legions would consider
      these chosen Prætorians as the representatives of the whole
      military order; and that the present aid of fifty thousand men,
      superior in arms and appointments to any force that could be
      brought into the field against them, would forever crush the
      hopes of rebellion, and secure the empire to himself and his
      posterity.


      66 (return) [ Herodian, l. iii. p. 131.]


      67 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxiv. p. 1243.]


      The command of these favored and formidable troops soon became
      the first office of the empire. As the government degenerated
      into military despotism, the Prætorian Præfect, who in his origin
      had been a simple captain of the guards, 671 was placed not only
      at the head of the army, but of the finances, and even of the
      law. In every department of administration, he represented the
      person, and exercised the authority, of the emperor. The first
      præfect who enjoyed and abused this immense power was Plautianus,
      the favorite minister of Severus. His reign lasted above ten
      years, till the marriage of his daughter with the eldest son of
      the emperor, which seemed to assure his fortune, proved the
      occasion of his ruin. 68 The animosities of the palace, by
      irritating the ambition and alarming the fears of Plautianus, 681
      threatened to produce a revolution, and obliged the emperor, who
      still loved him, to consent with reluctance to his death. 69
      After the fall of Plautianus, an eminent lawyer, the celebrated
      Papinian, was appointed to execute the motley office of Prætorian
      Præfect.


      671 (return) [ The Prætorian Præfect had never been a simple
      captain of the guards; from the first creation of this office,
      under Augustus, it possessed great power. That emperor,
      therefore, decreed that there should be always two Prætorian
      Præfects, who could only be taken from the equestrian order
      Tiberius first departed from the former clause of this edict;
      Alexander Severus violated the second by naming senators
      præfects. It appears that it was under Commodus that the
      Prætorian Præfects obtained the province of civil jurisdiction.
      It extended only to Italy, with the exception of Rome and its
      district, which was governed by the Præfectus urbi. As to the
      control of the finances, and the levying of taxes, it was not
      intrusted to them till after the great change that Constantine I.
      made in the organization of the empire at least, I know no
      passage which assigns it to them before that time; and
      Drakenborch, who has treated this question in his Dissertation de
      official præfectorum prætorio, vi., does not quote one.—W.]


      68 (return) [ One of his most daring and wanton acts of power,
      was the castration of a hundred free Romans, some of them married
      men, and even fathers of families; merely that his daughter, on
      her marriage with the young emperor, might be attended by a train
      of eunuchs worthy of an eastern queen. Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1271.]


      681 (return) [ Plautianus was compatriot, relative, and the old
      friend, of Severus; he had so completely shut up all access to
      the emperor, that the latter was ignorant how far he abused his
      powers: at length, being informed of it, he began to limit his
      authority. The marriage of Plautilla with Caracalla was
      unfortunate; and the prince who had been forced to consent to it,
      menaced the father and the daughter with death when he should
      come to the throne. It was feared, after that, that Plautianus
      would avail himself of the power which he still possessed,
      against the Imperial family; and Severus caused him to be
      assassinated in his presence, upon the pretext of a conspiracy,
      which Dion considers fictitious.—W. This note is not, perhaps,
      very necessary and does not contain the whole facts. Dion
      considers the conspiracy the invention of Caracalla, by whose
      command, almost by whose hand, Plautianus was slain in the
      presence of Severus.—M.]


      69 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1274. Herodian, l. iii. p. 122,
      129. The grammarian of Alexander seems, as is not unusual, much
      better acquainted with this mysterious transaction, and more
      assured of the guilt of Plautianus than the Roman senator
      ventures to be.]


      Till the reign of Severus, the virtue and even the good sense of
      the emperors had been distinguished by their zeal or affected
      reverence for the senate, and by a tender regard to the nice
      frame of civil policy instituted by Augustus. But the youth of
      Severus had been trained in the implicit obedience of camps, and
      his riper years spent in the despotism of military command. His
      haughty and inflexible spirit could not discover, or would not
      acknowledge, the advantage of preserving an intermediate power,
      however imaginary, between the emperor and the army. He disdained
      to profess himself the servant of an assembly that detested his
      person and trembled at his frown; he issued his commands, where
      his requests would have proved as effectual; assumed the conduct
      and style of a sovereign and a conqueror, and exercised, without
      disguise, the whole legislative, as well as the executive power.


      The victory over the senate was easy and inglorious. Every eye
      and every passion were directed to the supreme magistrate, who
      possessed the arms and treasure of the state; whilst the senate,
      neither elected by the people, nor guarded by military force, nor
      animated by public spirit, rested its declining authority on the
      frail and crumbling basis of ancient opinion. The fine theory of
      a republic insensibly vanished, and made way for the more natural
      and substantial feelings of monarchy. As the freedom and honors
      of Rome were successively communicated to the provinces, in which
      the old government had been either unknown, or was remembered
      with abhorrence, the tradition of republican maxims was gradually
      obliterated. The Greek historians of the age of the Antonines 70
      observe, with a malicious pleasure, that although the sovereign
      of Rome, in compliance with an obsolete prejudice, abstained from
      the name of king, he possessed the full measure of regal power.
      In the reign of Severus, the senate was filled with polished and
      eloquent slaves from the eastern provinces, who justified
      personal flattery by speculative principles of servitude. These
      new advocates of prerogative were heard with pleasure by the
      court, and with patience by the people, when they inculcated the
      duty of passive obedience, and descanted on the inevitable
      mischiefs of freedom. The lawyers and historians concurred in
      teaching, that the Imperial authority was held, not by the
      delegated commission, but by the irrevocable resignation of the
      senate; that the emperor was freed from the restraint of civil
      laws, could command by his arbitrary will the lives and fortunes
      of his subjects, and might dispose of the empire as of his
      private patrimony. 71 The most eminent of the civil lawyers, and
      particularly Papinian, Paulus, and Ulpian, flourished under the
      house of Severus; and the Roman jurisprudence, having closely
      united itself with the system of monarchy, was supposed to have
      attained its full majority and perfection.


      70 (return) [ Appian in Proœm.]


      71 (return) [ Dion Cassius seems to have written with no other
      view than to form these opinions into an historical system. The
      Pandea’s will how how assiduously the lawyers, on their side,
      laboree in the cause of prerogative.]


      The contemporaries of Severus in the enjoyment of the peace and
      glory of his reign, forgave the cruelties by which it had been
      introduced. Posterity, who experienced the fatal effects of his
      maxims and example, justly considered him as the principal author
      of the decline of the Roman empire.


      Chapter VI: Death Of Severus, Tyranny Of Caracalla, Usurpation Of
      Marcinus.—Part I.


The Death Of Severus.—Tyranny Of Caracalla.—Usurpation Of
Macrinus.—Follies Of Elagabalus.—Virtues Of Alexander
Severus.—Licentiousness Of The Army.—General State Of The Roman
Finances.


      The ascent to greatness, however steep and dangerous, may
      entertain an active spirit with the consciousness and exercise of
      its own powers: but the possession of a throne could never yet
      afford a lasting satisfaction to an ambitious mind. This
      melancholy truth was felt and acknowledged by Severus. Fortune
      and merit had, from an humble station, elevated him to the first
      place among mankind. “He had been all things,” as he said
      himself, “and all was of little value.” 1 Distracted with the
      care, not of acquiring, but of preserving an empire, oppressed
      with age and infirmities, careless of fame, 2 and satiated with
      power, all his prospects of life were closed. The desire of
      perpetuating the greatness of his family was the only remaining
      wish of his ambition and paternal tenderness.


      1 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 71. “Omnia fui, et nihil expedit.”]


      2 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxxvi. p. 1284.]


      Like most of the Africans, Severus was passionately addicted to
      the vain studies of magic and divination, deeply versed in the
      interpretation of dreams and omens, and perfectly acquainted with
      the science of judicial astrology; which, in almost every age
      except the present, has maintained its dominion over the mind of
      man. He had lost his first wife, while he was governor of the
      Lionnese Gaul. 3 In the choice of a second, he sought only to
      connect himself with some favorite of fortune; and as soon as he
      had discovered that the young lady of Emesa in Syria had _a royal
      nativity_, he solicited and obtained her hand. 4 Julia Domna (for
      that was her name) deserved all that the stars could promise her.


      She possessed, even in advanced age, the attractions of beauty, 5
      and united to a lively imagination a firmness of mind, and
      strength of judgment, seldom bestowed on her sex. Her amiable
      qualities never made any deep impression on the dark and jealous
      temper of her husband; but in her son’s reign, she administered
      the principal affairs of the empire, with a prudence that
      supported his authority, and with a moderation that sometimes
      corrected his wild extravagancies. 6 Julia applied herself to
      letters and philosophy, with some success, and with the most
      splendid reputation. She was the patroness of every art, and the
      friend of every man of genius. 7 The grateful flattery of the
      learned has celebrated her virtues; but, if we may credit the
      scandal of ancient history, chastity was very far from being the
      most conspicuous virtue of the empress Julia. 8


      3 (return) [ About the year 186. M. de Tillemont is miserably
      embarrassed with a passage of Dion, in which the empress
      Faustina, who died in the year 175, is introduced as having
      contributed to the marriage of Severus and Julia, (l. lxxiv. p.
      1243.) The learned compiler forgot that Dion is relating not a
      real fact, but a dream of Severus; and dreams are circumscribed
      to no limits of time or space. Did M. de Tillemont imagine that
      marriages were consummated in the temple of Venus at Rome? Hist.
      des Empereurs, tom. iii. p. 389. Note 6.]


      4 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 65.]


      5 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 5.]


      6 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxxvii. p. 1304, 1314.]


      7 (return) [ See a dissertation of Menage, at the end of his
      edition of Diogenes Lærtius, de Fœminis Philosophis.]


      8 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1285. Aurelius Victor.]


      Two sons, Caracalla 9 and Geta, were the fruit of this marriage,
      and the destined heirs of the empire. The fond hopes of the
      father, and of the Roman world, were soon disappointed by these
      vain youths, who displayed the indolent security of hereditary
      princes; and a presumption that fortune would supply the place of
      merit and application. Without any emulation of virtue or
      talents, they discovered, almost from their infancy, a fixed and
      implacable antipathy for each other.


      9 (return) [ Bassianus was his first name, as it had been that of
      his maternal grandfather. During his reign, he assumed the
      appellation of Antoninus, which is employed by lawyers and
      ancient historians. After his death, the public indignation
      loaded him with the nicknames of Tarantus and Caracalla. The
      first was borrowed from a celebrated Gladiator, the second from a
      long Gallic gown which he distributed to the people of Rome.]


      Their aversion, confirmed by years, and fomented by the arts of
      their interested favorites, broke out in childish, and gradually
      in more serious competitions; and, at length, divided the
      theatre, the circus, and the court, into two factions, actuated
      by the hopes and fears of their respective leaders. The prudent
      emperor endeavored, by every expedient of advice and authority,
      to allay this growing animosity. The unhappy discord of his sons
      clouded all his prospects, and threatened to overturn a throne
      raised with so much labor, cemented with so much blood, and
      guarded with every defence of arms and treasure. With an
      impartial hand he maintained between them an exact balance of
      favor, conferred on both the rank of Augustus, with the revered
      name of Antoninus; and for the first time the Roman world beheld
      three emperors. 10 Yet even this equal conduct served only to
      inflame the contest, whilst the fierce Caracalla asserted the
      right of primogeniture, and the milder Geta courted the
      affections of the people and the soldiers. In the anguish of a
      disappointed father, Severus foretold that the weaker of his sons
      would fall a sacrifice to the stronger; who, in his turn, would
      be ruined by his own vices. 11


      10 (return) [ The elevation of Caracalla is fixed by the accurate
      M. de Tillemont to the year 198; the association of Geta to the
      year 208.]


      11 (return) [ Herodian, l. iii. p. 130. The lives of Caracalla
      and Geta, in the Augustan History.]


      In these circumstances the intelligence of a war in Britain, and
      of an invasion of the province by the barbarians of the North,
      was received with pleasure by Severus. Though the vigilance of
      his lieutenants might have been sufficient to repel the distant
      enemy, he resolved to embrace the honorable pretext of
      withdrawing his sons from the luxury of Rome, which enervated
      their minds and irritated their passions; and of inuring their
      youth to the toils of war and government. Notwithstanding his
      advanced age, (for he was above threescore,) and his gout, which
      obliged him to be carried in a litter, he transported himself in
      person into that remote island, attended by his two sons, his
      whole court, and a formidable army. He immediately passed the
      walls of Hadrian and Antoninus, and entered the enemy’s country,
      with a design of completing the long attempted conquest of
      Britain. He penetrated to the northern extremity of the island,
      without meeting an enemy. But the concealed ambuscades of the
      Caledonians, who hung unseen on the rear and flanks of his army,
      the coldness of the climate and the severity of a winter march
      across the hills and morasses of Scotland, are reported to have
      cost the Romans above fifty thousand men. The Caledonians at
      length yielded to the powerful and obstinate attack, sued for
      peace, and surrendered a part of their arms, and a large tract of
      territory. But their apparent submission lasted no longer than
      the present terror. As soon as the Roman legions had retired,
      they resumed their hostile independence. Their restless spirit
      provoked Severus to send a new army into Caledonia, with the most
      bloody orders, not to subdue, but to extirpate the natives. They
      were saved by the death of their haughty enemy. 12


      12 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1280, &c. Herodian, l. iii. p.
      132, &c.]


      This Caledonian war, neither marked by decisive events, nor
      attended with any important consequences, would ill deserve our
      attention; but it is supposed, not without a considerable degree
      of probability, that the invasion of Severus is connected with
      the most shining period of the British history or fable. Fingal,
      whose fame, with that of his heroes and bards, has been revived
      in our language by a recent publication, is said to have
      commanded the Caledonians in that memorable juncture, to have
      eluded the power of Severus, and to have obtained a signal
      victory on the banks of the Carun, in which the son of _the King
      of the World_, Caracul, fled from his arms along the fields of
      his pride. 13 Something of a doubtful mist still hangs over these
      Highland traditions; nor can it be entirely dispelled by the most
      ingenious researches of modern criticism; 14 but if we could,
      with safety, indulge the pleasing supposition, that Fingal lived,
      and that Ossian sung, the striking contrast of the situation and
      manners of the contending nations might amuse a philosophic mind.


      The parallel would be little to the advantage of the more
      civilized people, if we compared the unrelenting revenge of
      Severus with the generous clemency of Fingal; the timid and
      brutal cruelty of Caracalla with the bravery, the tenderness, the
      elegant genius of Ossian; the mercenary chiefs, who, from motives
      of fear or interest, served under the imperial standard, with the
      free-born warriors who started to arms at the voice of the king
      of Morven; if, in a word, we contemplated the untutored
      Caledonians, glowing with the warm virtues of nature, and the
      degenerate Romans, polluted with the mean vices of wealth and
      slavery.


      13 (return) [ Ossian’s Poems, vol. i. p. 175.]


      14 (return) [ That the Caracul of Ossian is the Caracalla of the
      Roman History, is, perhaps, the only point of British antiquity
      in which Mr. Macpherson and Mr. Whitaker are of the same opinion;
      and yet the opinion is not without difficulty. In the Caledonian
      war, the son of Severus was known only by the appellation of
      Antoninus, and it may seem strange that the Highland bard should
      describe him by a nickname, invented four years afterwards,
      scarcely used by the Romans till after the death of that emperor,
      and seldom employed by the most ancient historians. See Dion, l.
      lxxvii. p. 1317. Hist. August. p. 89 Aurel. Victor. Euseb. in
      Chron. ad ann. 214. Note: The historical authority of
      Macpherson’s Ossian has not increased since Gibbon wrote. We may,
      indeed, consider it exploded. Mr. Whitaker, in a letter to Gibbon
      (Misc. Works, vol. ii. p. 100,) attempts, not very successfully,
      to weaken this objection of the historian.—M.]


      The declining health and last illness of Severus inflamed the
      wild ambition and black passions of Caracalla’s soul. Impatient
      of any delay or division of empire, he attempted, more than once,
      to shorten the small remainder of his father’s days, and
      endeavored, but without success, to excite a mutiny among the
      troops. 15 The old emperor had often censured the misguided
      lenity of Marcus, who, by a single act of justice, might have
      saved the Romans from the tyranny of his worthless son. Placed in
      the same situation, he experienced how easily the rigor of a
      judge dissolves away in the tenderness of a parent. He
      deliberated, he threatened, but he could not punish; and this
      last and only instance of mercy was more fatal to the empire than
      a long series of cruelty. 16 The disorder of his mind irritated
      the pains of his body; he wished impatiently for death, and
      hastened the instant of it by his impatience. He expired at York
      in the sixty-fifth year of his life, and in the eighteenth of a
      glorious and successful reign. In his last moments he recommended
      concord to his sons, and his sons to the army. The salutary
      advice never reached the heart, or even the understanding, of the
      impetuous youths; but the more obedient troops, mindful of their
      oath of allegiance, and of the authority of their deceased
      master, resisted the solicitations of Caracalla, and proclaimed
      both brothers emperors of Rome. The new princes soon left the
      Caledonians in peace, returned to the capital, celebrated their
      father’s funeral with divine honors, and were cheerfully
      acknowledged as lawful sovereigns, by the senate, the people, and
      the provinces. Some preeminence of rank seems to have been
      allowed to the elder brother; but they both administered the
      empire with equal and independent power. 17


      15 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1282. Hist. August. p. 71.
      Aurel. Victor.]


      16 (return) [Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1283. Hist. August. p. 89]


      17 (return) [Footnote 17: Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1284. Herodian, l.
      iii. p. 135.]


      Such a divided form of government would have proved a source of
      discord between the most affectionate brothers. It was impossible
      that it could long subsist between two implacable enemies, who
      neither desired nor could trust a reconciliation. It was visible
      that one only could reign, and that the other must fall; and each
      of them, judging of his rival’s designs by his own, guarded his
      life with the most jealous vigilance from the repeated attacks of
      poison or the sword. Their rapid journey through Gaul and Italy,
      during which they never ate at the same table, or slept in the
      same house, displayed to the provinces the odious spectacle of
      fraternal discord. On their arrival at Rome, they immediately
      divided the vast extent of the imperial palace. 18 No
      communication was allowed between their apartments; the doors and
      passages were diligently fortified, and guards posted and
      relieved with the same strictness as in a besieged place. The
      emperors met only in public, in the presence of their afflicted
      mother; and each surrounded by a numerous train of armed
      followers. Even on these occasions of ceremony, the dissimulation
      of courts could ill disguise the rancor of their hearts. 19


      18 (return) [ Mr. Hume is justly surprised at a passage of
      Herodian, (l. iv. p. 139,) who, on this occasion, represents the
      Imperial palace as equal in extent to the rest of Rome. The whole
      region of the Palatine Mount, on which it was built, occupied, at
      most, a circumference of eleven or twelve thousand feet, (see the
      Notitia and Victor, in Nardini’s Roma Antica.) But we should
      recollect that the opulent senators had almost surrounded the
      city with their extensive gardens and suburb palaces, the
      greatest part of which had been gradually confiscated by the
      emperors. If Geta resided in the gardens that bore his name on
      the Janiculum, and if Caracalla inhabited the gardens of Mæcenas
      on the Esquiline, the rival brothers were separated from each
      other by the distance of several miles; and yet the intermediate
      space was filled by the Imperial gardens of Sallust, of Lucullus,
      of Agrippa, of Domitian, of Caius, &c., all skirting round the
      city, and all connected with each other, and with the palace, by
      bridges thrown over the Tiber and the streets. But this
      explanation of Herodian would require, though it ill deserves, a
      particular dissertation, illustrated by a map of ancient Rome.
      (Hume, Essay on Populousness of Ancient Nations.—M.)]


      19 (return) [ Herodian, l. iv. p. 139]


      This latent civil war already distracted the whole government,
      when a scheme was suggested that seemed of mutual benefit to the
      hostile brothers. It was proposed, that since it was impossible
      to reconcile their minds, they should separate their interest,
      and divide the empire between them. The conditions of the treaty
      were already drawn with some accuracy. It was agreed that
      Caracalla, as the elder brother should remain in possession of
      Europe and the western Africa; and that he should relinquish the
      sovereignty of Asia and Egypt to Geta, who might fix his
      residence at Alexandria or Antioch, cities little inferior to
      Rome itself in wealth and greatness; that numerous armies should
      be constantly encamped on either side of the Thracian Bosphorus,
      to guard the frontiers of the rival monarchies; and that the
      senators of European extraction should acknowledge the sovereign
      of Rome, whilst the natives of Asia followed the emperor of the
      East. The tears of the empress Julia interrupted the negotiation,
      the first idea of which had filled every Roman breast with
      surprise and indignation. The mighty mass of conquest was so
      intimately united by the hand of time and policy, that it
      required the most forcible violence to rend it asunder. The
      Romans had reason to dread, that the disjointed members would
      soon be reduced by a civil war under the dominion of one master;
      but if the separation was permanent, the division of the
      provinces must terminate in the dissolution of an empire whose
      unity had hitherto remained inviolate. 20


      20 (return) [ Herodian, l. iv. p. 144.]


      Had the treaty been carried into execution, the sovereign of
      Europe might soon have been the conqueror of Asia; but Caracalla
      obtained an easier, though a more guilty, victory. He artfully
      listened to his mother’s entreaties, and consented to meet his
      brother in her apartment, on terms of peace and reconciliation.
      In the midst of their conversation, some centurions, who had
      contrived to conceal themselves, rushed with drawn swords upon
      the unfortunate Geta. His distracted mother strove to protect him
      in her arms; but, in the unavailing struggle, she was wounded in
      the hand, and covered with the blood of her younger son, while
      she saw the elder animating and assisting 21 the fury of the
      assassins. As soon as the deed was perpetrated, Caracalla, with
      hasty steps, and horror in his countenance, ran towards the
      Prætorian camp, as his only refuge, and threw himself on the
      ground before the statues of the tutelar deities. 22 The soldiers
      attempted to raise and comfort him. In broken and disordered
      words he informed them of his imminent danger, and fortunate
      escape; insinuating that he had prevented the designs of his
      enemy, and declared his resolution to live and die with his
      faithful troops. Geta had been the favorite of the soldiers; but
      complaint was useless, revenge was dangerous, and they still
      reverenced the son of Severus. Their discontent died away in idle
      murmurs, and Caracalla soon convinced them of the justice of his
      cause, by distributing in one lavish donative the accumulated
      treasures of his father’s reign. 23 The real _sentiments_ of the
      soldiers alone were of importance to his power or safety. Their
      declaration in his favor commanded the dutiful _professions_ of
      the senate. The obsequious assembly was always prepared to ratify
      the decision of fortune; 231 but as Caracalla wished to assuage
      the first emotions of public indignation, the name of Geta was
      mentioned with decency, and he received the funeral honors of a
      Roman emperor. 24 Posterity, in pity to his misfortune, has cast
      a veil over his vices. We consider that young prince as the
      innocent victim of his brother’s ambition, without recollecting
      that he himself wanted power, rather than inclination, to
      consummate the same attempts of revenge and murder. 241


      21 (return) [ Caracalla consecrated, in the temple of Serapis,
      the sword with which, as he boasted, he had slain his brother
      Geta. Dion, l. lxxvii p. 1307.]


      22 (return) [ Herodian, l. iv. p. 147. In every Roman camp there
      was a small chapel near the head-quarters, in which the statues
      of the tutelar deities were preserved and adored; and we may
      remark that the eagles, and other military ensigns, were in the
      first rank of these deities; an excellent institution, which
      confirmed discipline by the sanction of religion. See Lipsius de
      Militia Romana, iv. 5, v. 2.]


      23 (return) [ Herodian, l. iv. p. 148. Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1289.]


      231 (return) [ The account of this transaction, in a new passage
      of Dion, varies in some degree from this statement. It adds that
      the next morning, in the senate, Antoninus requested their
      indulgence, not because he had killed his brother, but because he
      was hoarse, and could not address them. Mai. Fragm. p. 228.—M.]


      24 (return) [ Geta was placed among the gods. Sit divus, dum non
      sit vivus said his brother. Hist. August. p. 91. Some marks of
      Geta’s consecration are still found upon medals.]


      241 (return) [ The favorable judgment which history has given of
      Geta is not founded solely on a feeling of pity; it is supported
      by the testimony of contemporary historians: he was too fond of
      the pleasures of the table, and showed great mistrust of his
      brother; but he was humane, well instructed; he often endeavored
      to mitigate the rigorous decrees of Severus and Caracalla. Herod
      iv. 3. Spartian in Geta.—W.]


      The crime went not unpunished. Neither business, nor pleasure,
      nor flattery, could defend Caracalla from the stings of a guilty
      conscience; and he confessed, in the anguish of a tortured mind,
      that his disordered fancy often beheld the angry forms of his
      father and his brother rising into life, to threaten and upbraid
      him. 25 The consciousness of his crime should have induced him to
      convince mankind, by the virtues of his reign, that the bloody
      deed had been the involuntary effect of fatal necessity. But the
      repentance of Caracalla only prompted him to remove from the
      world whatever could remind him of his guilt, or recall the
      memory of his murdered brother. On his return from the senate to
      the palace, he found his mother in the company of several noble
      matrons, weeping over the untimely fate of her younger son. The
      jealous emperor threatened them with instant death; the sentence
      was executed against Fadilla, the last remaining daughter of the
      emperor Marcus; 251 and even the afflicted Julia was obliged to
      silence her lamentations, to suppress her sighs, and to receive
      the assassin with smiles of joy and approbation. It was computed
      that, under the vague appellation of the friends of Geta, above
      twenty thousand persons of both sexes suffered death. His guards
      and freedmen, the ministers of his serious business, and the
      companions of his looser hours, those who by his interest had
      been promoted to any commands in the army or provinces, with the
      long connected chain of their dependants, were included in the
      proscription; which endeavored to reach every one who had
      maintained the smallest correspondence with Geta, who lamented
      his death, or who even mentioned his name. 26 Helvius Pertinax,
      son to the prince of that name, lost his life by an unseasonable
      witticism. 27 It was a sufficient crime of Thrasea Priscus to be
      descended from a family in which the love of liberty seemed an
      hereditary quality. 28 The particular causes of calumny and
      suspicion were at length exhausted; and when a senator was
      accused of being a secret enemy to the government, the emperor
      was satisfied with the general proof that he was a man of
      property and virtue. From this well-grounded principle he
      frequently drew the most bloody inferences. 281


      25 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1307]


      251 (return) [ The most valuable paragraph of dion, which the
      industry of M. Manas recovered, relates to this daughter of
      Marcus, executed by Caracalla. Her name, as appears from Fronto,
      as well as from Dion, was Cornificia. When commanded to choose
      the kind of death she was to suffer, she burst into womanish
      tears; but remembering her father Marcus, she thus spoke:—“O my
      hapless soul, (... animula,) now imprisoned in the body, burst
      forth! be free! show them, however reluctant to believe it, that
      thou art the daughter of Marcus.” She then laid aside all her
      ornaments, and preparing herself for death, ordered her veins to
      be opened. Mai. Fragm. Vatican ii p. 220.—M.]


      26 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1290. Herodian, l. iv. p. 150.
      Dion (p. 2298) says, that the comic poets no longer durst employ
      the name of Geta in their plays, and that the estates of those
      who mentioned it in their testaments were confiscated.]


      27 (return) [ Caracalla had assumed the names of several
      conquered nations; Pertinax observed, that the name of Geticus
      (he had obtained some advantage over the Goths, or Getæ) would be
      a proper addition to Parthieus, Alemannicus, &c. Hist. August. p.
      89.]


      28 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1291. He was probably descended
      from Helvidius Priscus, and Thrasea Pætus, those patriots, whose
      firm, but useless and unseasonable, virtue has been immortalized
      by Tacitus. Note: M. Guizot is indignant at this “cold”
      observation of Gibbon on the noble character of Thrasea; but he
      admits that his virtue was useless to the public, and
      unseasonable amidst the vices of his age.—M.]


      281 (return) [ Caracalla reproached all those who demanded no
      favors of him. “It is clear that if you make me no requests, you
      do not trust me; if you do not trust me, you suspect me; if you
      suspect me, you fear me; if you fear me, you hate me.” And
      forthwith he condemned them as conspirators, a good specimen of
      the sorites in a tyrant’s logic. See Fragm. Vatican p.—M.]


      Chapter VI: Death Of Severus, Tyranny Of Caracalla, Usurpation Of
      Marcinus.—Part II.


      The execution of so many innocent citizens was bewailed by the
      secret tears of their friends and families. The death of
      Papinian, the Prætorian Præfect, was lamented as a public
      calamity. 282 During the last seven years of Severus, he had
      exercised the most important offices of the state, and, by his
      salutary influence, guided the emperor’s steps in the paths of
      justice and moderation. In full assurance of his virtue and
      abilities, Severus, on his death-bed, had conjured him to watch
      over the prosperity and union of the Imperial family. 29 The
      honest labors of Papinian served only to inflame the hatred which
      Caracalla had already conceived against his father’s minister.
      After the murder of Geta, the Præfect was commanded to exert the
      powers of his skill and eloquence in a studied apology for that
      atrocious deed. The philosophic Seneca had condescended to
      compose a similar epistle to the senate, in the name of the son
      and assassin of Agrippina. 30 “That it was easier to commit than
      to justify a parricide,” was the glorious reply of Papinian; 31
      who did not hesitate between the loss of life and that of honor.
      Such intrepid virtue, which had escaped pure and unsullied from
      the intrigues of courts, the habits of business, and the arts of
      his profession, reflects more lustre on the memory of Papinian,
      than all his great employments, his numerous writings, and the
      superior reputation as a lawyer, which he has preserved through
      every age of the Roman jurisprudence. 32


      282 (return) [ Papinian was no longer Prætorian Præfect.
      Caracalla had deprived him of that office immediately after the
      death of Severus. Such is the statement of Dion; and the
      testimony of Spartian, who gives Papinian the Prætorian
      præfecture till his death, is of little weight opposed to that of
      a senator then living at Rome.—W.]


      29 (return) [ It is said that Papinian was himself a relation of
      the empress Julia.]


      30 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xiv. 2.]


      31 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 88.]


      32 (return) [ With regard to Papinian, see Heineccius’s Historia
      Juris Roma ni, l. 330, &c.]


      It had hitherto been the peculiar felicity of the Romans, and in
      the worst of times the consolation, that the virtue of the
      emperors was active, and their vice indolent. Augustus, Trajan,
      Hadrian, and Marcus visited their extensive dominions in person,
      and their progress was marked by acts of wisdom and beneficence.
      The tyranny of Tiberius, Nero, and Domitian, who resided almost
      constantly at Rome, or in the adjacent was confined to the
      senatorial and equestrian orders. 33 But Caracalla was the common
      enemy of mankind. He left the capital (and he never returned to
      it) about a year after the murder of Geta. The rest of his reign
      was spent in the several provinces of the empire, particularly
      those of the East, and every province was by turns the scene of
      his rapine and cruelty. The senators, compelled by fear to attend
      his capricious motions, were obliged to provide daily
      entertainments at an immense expense, which he abandoned with
      contempt to his guards; and to erect, in every city, magnificent
      palaces and theatres, which he either disdained to visit, or
      ordered immediately thrown down. The most wealthy families were
      ruined by partial fines and confiscations, and the great body of
      his subjects oppressed by ingenious and aggravated taxes. 34 In
      the midst of peace, and upon the slightest provocation, he issued
      his commands, at Alexandria, in Egypt for a general massacre.
      From a secure post in the temple of Serapis, he viewed and
      directed the slaughter of many thousand citizens, as well as
      strangers, without distinguishing the number or the crime of the
      sufferers; since as he coolly informed the senate, _all_ the
      Alexandrians, those who had perished, and those who had escaped,
      were alike guilty. 35


      33 (return) [ Tiberius and Domitian never moved from the
      neighborhood of Rome. Nero made a short journey into Greece. “Et
      laudatorum Principum usus ex æquo, quamvis procul agentibus. Sævi
      proximis ingruunt.” Tacit. Hist. iv. 74.]


      34 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1294.]


      35 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1307. Herodian, l. iv. p. 158.
      The former represents it as a cruel massacre, the latter as a
      perfidious one too. It seems probable that the Alexandrians has
      irritated the tyrant by their railleries, and perhaps by their
      tumults. * Note: After these massacres, Caracalla also deprived
      the Alexandrians of their spectacles and public feasts; he
      divided the city into two parts by a wall with towers at
      intervals, to prevent the peaceful communications of the
      citizens. Thus was treated the unhappy Alexandria, says Dion, by
      the savage beast of Ausonia. This, in fact, was the epithet which
      the oracle had applied to him; it is said, indeed, that he was
      much pleased with the name and often boasted of it. Dion, lxxvii.
      p. 1307.—G.]


      The wise instructions of Severus never made any lasting
      impression on the mind of his son, who, although not destitute of
      imagination and eloquence, was equally devoid of judgment and
      humanity. 36 One dangerous maxim, worthy of a tyrant, was
      remembered and abused by Caracalla. “To secure the affections of
      the army, and to esteem the rest of his subjects as of little
      moment.” 37 But the liberality of the father had been restrained
      by prudence, and his indulgence to the troops was tempered by
      firmness and authority. The careless profusion of the son was the
      policy of one reign, and the inevitable ruin both of the army and
      of the empire. The vigor of the soldiers, instead of being
      confirmed by the severe discipline of camps, melted away in the
      luxury of cities. The excessive increase of their pay and
      donatives 38 exhausted the state to enrich the military order,
      whose modesty in peace, and service in war, is best secured by an
      honorable poverty. The demeanor of Caracalla was haughty and full
      of pride; but with the troops he forgot even the proper dignity
      of his rank, encouraged their insolent familiarity, and,
      neglecting the essential duties of a general, affected to imitate
      the dress and manners of a common soldier.


      36 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1296.]


      37 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1284. Mr. Wotton (Hist. of Rome,
      p. 330) suspects that this maxim was invented by Caracalla
      himself, and attributed to his father.]


      38 (return) [ Dion (l. lxxviii. p. 1343) informs us that the
      extraordinary gifts of Caracalla to the army amounted annually to
      seventy millions of drachmæ (about two millions three hundred and
      fifty thousand pounds.) There is another passage in Dion,
      concerning the military pay, infinitely curious, were it not
      obscure, imperfect, and probably corrupt. The best sense seems to
      be, that the Prætorian guards received twelve hundred and fifty
      drachmæ, (forty pounds a year,) (Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1307.) Under
      the reign of Augustus, they were paid at the rate of two drachmæ,
      or denarii, per day, 720 a year, (Tacit. Annal. i. 17.) Domitian,
      who increased the soldiers’ pay one fourth, must have raised the
      Prætorians to 960 drachmæ, (Gronoviue de Pecunia Veteri, l. iii.
      c. 2.) These successive augmentations ruined the empire; for,
      with the soldiers’ pay, their numbers too were increased. We have
      seen the Prætorians alone increased from 10,000 to 50,000 men.
      Note: Valois and Reimar have explained in a very simple and
      probable manner this passage of Dion, which Gibbon seems to me
      not to have understood. He ordered that the soldiers should
      receive, as the reward of their services the Prætorians 1250
      drachms, the other 5000 drachms. Valois thinks that the numbers
      have been transposed, and that Caracalla added 5000 drachms to
      the donations made to the Prætorians, 1250 to those of the
      legionaries. The Prætorians, in fact, always received more than
      the others. The error of Gibbon arose from his considering that
      this referred to the annual pay of the soldiers, while it relates
      to the sum they received as a reward for their services on their
      discharge: donatives means recompense for service. Augustus had
      settled that the Prætorians, after sixteen campaigns, should
      receive 5000 drachms: the legionaries received only 3000 after
      twenty years. Caracalla added 5000 drachms to the donative of the
      Prætorians, 1250 to that of the legionaries. Gibbon appears to
      have been mistaken both in confounding this donative on discharge
      with the annual pay, and in not paying attention to the remark of
      Valois on the transposition of the numbers in the text.—G]


      It was impossible that such a character, and such conduct as that
      of Caracalla, could inspire either love or esteem; but as long as
      his vices were beneficial to the armies, he was secure from the
      danger of rebellion. A secret conspiracy, provoked by his own
      jealousy, was fatal to the tyrant. The Prætorian præfecture was
      divided between two ministers. The military department was
      intrusted to Adventus, an experienced rather than able soldier;
      and the civil affairs were transacted by Opilius Macrinus, who,
      by his dexterity in business, had raised himself, with a fair
      character, to that high office. But his favor varied with the
      caprice of the emperor, and his life might depend on the
      slightest suspicion, or the most casual circumstance. Malice or
      fanaticism had suggested to an African, deeply skilled in the
      knowledge of futurity, a very dangerous prediction, that Macrinus
      and his son were destined to reign over the empire. The report
      was soon diffused through the province; and when the man was sent
      in chains to Rome, he still asserted, in the presence of the
      præfect of the city, the faith of his prophecy. That magistrate,
      who had received the most pressing instructions to inform himself
      of the _successors_ of Caracalla, immediately communicated the
      examination of the African to the Imperial court, which at that
      time resided in Syria. But, notwithstanding the diligence of the
      public messengers, a friend of Macrinus found means to apprise
      him of the approaching danger. The emperor received the letters
      from Rome; and as he was then engaged in the conduct of a chariot
      race, he delivered them unopened to the Prætorian Præfect,
      directing him to despatch the ordinary affairs, and to report the
      more important business that might be contained in them. Macrinus
      read his fate, and resolved to prevent it. He inflamed the
      discontents of some inferior officers, and employed the hand of
      Martialis, a desperate soldier, who had been refused the rank of
      centurion. The devotion of Caracalla prompted him to make a
      pilgrimage from Edessa to the celebrated temple of the Moon at
      Carrhæ. 381 He was attended by a body of cavalry: but having
      stopped on the road for some necessary occasion, his guards
      preserved a respectful distance, and Martialis, approaching his
      person under a presence of duty, stabbed him with a dagger. The
      bold assassin was instantly killed by a Scythian archer of the
      Imperial guard. Such was the end of a monster whose life
      disgraced human nature, and whose reign accused the patience of
      the Romans. 39 The grateful soldiers forgot his vices, remembered
      only his partial liberality, and obliged the senate to prostitute
      their own dignity and that of religion, by granting him a place
      among the gods. Whilst he was upon earth, Alexander the Great was
      the only hero whom this god deemed worthy his admiration. He
      assumed the name and ensigns of Alexander, formed a Macedonian
      phalanx of guards, persecuted the disciples of Aristotle, and
      displayed, with a puerile enthusiasm, the only sentiment by which
      he discovered any regard for virtue or glory. We can easily
      conceive, that after the battle of Narva, and the conquest of
      Poland, Charles XII. (though he still wanted the more elegant
      accomplishments of the son of Philip) might boast of having
      rivalled his valor and magnanimity; but in no one action of his
      life did Caracalla express the faintest resemblance of the
      Macedonian hero, except in the murder of a great number of his
      own and of his father’s friends. 40


      381 (return) [ Carrhæ, now Harran, between Edessan and Nisibis,
      famous for the defeat of Crassus—the Haran from whence Abraham
      set out for the land of Canaan. This city has always been
      remarkable for its attachment to Sabaism—G]


      39 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxviii. p. 1312. Herodian, l. iv. p.
      168.]


      40 (return) [ The fondness of Caracalla for the name and ensigns
      of Alexander is still preserved on the medals of that emperor.
      See Spanheim, de Usu Numismatum, Dissertat. xii. Herodian (l. iv.
      p. 154) had seen very ridiculous pictures, in which a figure was
      drawn with one side of the face like Alexander, and the other
      like Caracalla.]


      After the extinction of the house of Severus, the Roman world
      remained three days without a master. The choice of the army (for
      the authority of a distant and feeble senate was little regarded)
      hung in anxious suspense, as no candidate presented himself whose
      distinguished birth and merit could engage their attachment and
      unite their suffrages. The decisive weight of the Prætorian
      guards elevated the hopes of their præfects, and these powerful
      ministers began to assert their _legal_ claim to fill the vacancy
      of the Imperial throne. Adventus, however, the senior præfect,
      conscious of his age and infirmities, of his small reputation,
      and his smaller abilities, resigned the dangerous honor to the
      crafty ambition of his colleague Macrinus, whose well-dissembled
      grief removed all suspicion of his being accessary to his
      master’s death. 41 The troops neither loved nor esteemed his
      character. They cast their eyes around in search of a competitor,
      and at last yielded with reluctance to his promises of unbounded
      liberality and indulgence. A short time after his accession, he
      conferred on his son Diadumenianus, at the age of only ten years,
      the Imperial title, and the popular name of Antoninus. The
      beautiful figure of the youth, assisted by an additional
      donative, for which the ceremony furnished a pretext, might
      attract, it was hoped, the favor of the army, and secure the
      doubtful throne of Macrinus.


      41 (return) [ Herodian, l. iv. p. 169. Hist. August. p. 94.]


      The authority of the new sovereign had been ratified by the
      cheerful submission of the senate and provinces. They exulted in
      their unexpected deliverance from a hated tyrant, and it seemed
      of little consequence to examine into the virtues of the
      successor of Caracalla. But as soon as the first transports of
      joy and surprise had subsided, they began to scrutinize the
      merits of Macrinus with a critical severity, and to arraign the
      nasty choice of the army. It had hitherto been considered as a
      fundamental maxim of the constitution, that the emperor must be
      always chosen in the senate, and the sovereign power, no longer
      exercised by the whole body, was always delegated to one of its
      members. But Macrinus was not a senator. 42 The sudden elevation
      of the Prætorian præfects betrayed the meanness of their origin;
      and the equestrian order was still in possession of that great
      office, which commanded with arbitrary sway the lives and
      fortunes of the senate. A murmur of indignation was heard, that a
      man, whose obscure 43 extraction had never been illustrated by
      any signal service, should dare to invest himself with the
      purple, instead of bestowing it on some distinguished senator,
      equal in birth and dignity to the splendor of the Imperial
      station. As soon as the character of Macrinus was surveyed by the
      sharp eye of discontent, some vices, and many defects, were
      easily discovered. The choice of his ministers was in many
      instances justly censured, and the dissatisfied people, with
      their usual candor, accused at once his indolent tameness and his
      excessive severity. 44


      42 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxxviii. p. 1350. Elagabalus reproached
      his predecessor with daring to seat himself on the throne;
      though, as Prætorian præfect, he could not have been admitted
      into the senate after the voice of the crier had cleared the
      house. The personal favor of Plautianus and Sejanus had broke
      through the established rule. They rose, indeed, from the
      equestrian order; but they preserved the præfecture, with the
      rank of senator and even with the annulship.]


      43 (return) [ He was a native of Cæsarea, in Numidia, and began
      his fortune by serving in the household of Plautian, from whose
      ruin he narrowly escaped. His enemies asserted that he was born a
      slave, and had exercised, among other infamous professions, that
      of Gladiator. The fashion of aspersing the birth and condition of
      an adversary seems to have lasted from the time of the Greek
      orators to the learned grammarians of the last age.]


      44 (return) [ Both Dion and Herodian speak of the virtues and
      vices of Macrinus with candor and impartiality; but the author of
      his life, in the Augustan History, seems to have implicitly
      copied some of the venal writers, employed by Elagabalus, to
      blacken the memory of his predecessor.]


      His rash ambition had climbed a height where it was difficult to
      stand with firmness, and impossible to fall without instant
      destruction. Trained in the arts of courts and the forms of civil
      business, he trembled in the presence of the fierce and
      undisciplined multitude, over whom he had assumed the command;
      his military talents were despised, and his personal courage
      suspected; a whisper that circulated in the camp, disclosed the
      fatal secret of the conspiracy against the late emperor,
      aggravated the guilt of murder by the baseness of hypocrisy, and
      heightened contempt by detestation. To alienate the soldiers, and
      to provoke inevitable ruin, the character of a reformer was only
      wanting; and such was the peculiar hardship of his fate, that
      Macrinus was compelled to exercise that invidious office. The
      prodigality of Caracalla had left behind it a long train of ruin
      and disorder; and if that worthless tyrant had been capable of
      reflecting on the sure consequences of his own conduct, he would
      perhaps have enjoyed the dark prospect of the distress and
      calamities which he bequeathed to his successors.


      In the management of this necessary reformation, Macrinus
      proceeded with a cautious prudence, which would have restored
      health and vigor to the Roman army in an easy and almost
      imperceptible manner. To the soldiers already engaged in the
      service, he was constrained to leave the dangerous privileges and
      extravagant pay given by Caracalla; but the new recruits were
      received on the more moderate though liberal establishment of
      Severus, and gradually formed to modesty and obedience. 45 One
      fatal error destroyed the salutary effects of this judicious
      plan. The numerous army, assembled in the East by the late
      emperor, instead of being immediately dispersed by Macrinus
      through the several provinces, was suffered to remain united in
      Syria, during the winter that followed his elevation. In the
      luxurious idleness of their quarters, the troops viewed their
      strength and numbers, communicated their complaints, and revolved
      in their minds the advantages of another revolution. The
      veterans, instead of being flattered by the advantageous
      distinction, were alarmed by the first steps of the emperor,
      which they considered as the presage of his future intentions.
      The recruits, with sullen reluctance, entered on a service, whose
      labors were increased while its rewards were diminished by a
      covetous and unwarlike sovereign. The murmurs of the army swelled
      with impunity into seditious clamors; and the partial mutinies
      betrayed a spirit of discontent and disaffection that waited only
      for the slightest occasion to break out on every side into a
      general rebellion. To minds thus disposed, the occasion soon
      presented itself.


      45 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxxiii. p. 1336. The sense of the author
      is as the intention of the emperor; but Mr. Wotton has mistaken
      both, by understanding the distinction, not of veterans and
      recruits, but of old and new legions. History of Rome, p. 347.]


      The empress Julia had experienced all the vicissitudes of
      fortune. From an humble station she had been raised to greatness,
      only to taste the superior bitterness of an exalted rank. She was
      doomed to weep over the death of one of her sons, and over the
      life of the other. The cruel fate of Caracalla, though her good
      sense must have long taught her to expect it, awakened the
      feelings of a mother and of an empress. Notwithstanding the
      respectful civility expressed by the usurper towards the widow of
      Severus, she descended with a painful struggle into the condition
      of a subject, and soon withdrew herself, by a voluntary death,
      from the anxious and humiliating dependence. 46 461 Julia Mæsa,
      her sister, was ordered to leave the court and Antioch. She
      retired to Emesa with an immense fortune, the fruit of twenty
      years’ favor accompanied by her two daughters, Soæmias and Mamæ,
      each of whom was a widow, and each had an only son. Bassianus,
      462 for that was the name of the son of Soæmias, was consecrated
      to the honorable ministry of high priest of the Sun; and this
      holy vocation, embraced either from prudence or superstition,
      contributed to raise the Syrian youth to the empire of Rome. A
      numerous body of troops was stationed at Emesa; and as the severe
      discipline of Macrinus had constrained them to pass the winter
      encamped, they were eager to revenge the cruelty of such
      unaccustomed hardships. The soldiers, who resorted in crowds to
      the temple of the Sun, beheld with veneration and delight the
      elegant dress and figure of the young pontiff; they recognized,
      or they thought that they recognized, the features of Caracalla,
      whose memory they now adored. The artful Mæsa saw and cherished
      their rising partiality, and readily sacrificing her daughter’s
      reputation to the fortune of her grandson, she insinuated that
      Bassianus was the natural son of their murdered sovereign. The
      sums distributed by her emissaries with a lavish hand silenced
      every objection, and the profusion sufficiently proved the
      affinity, or at least the resemblance, of Bassianus with the
      great original. The young Antoninus (for he had assumed and
      polluted that respectable name) was declared emperor by the
      troops of Emesa, asserted his hereditary right, and called aloud
      on the armies to follow the standard of a young and liberal
      prince, who had taken up arms to revenge his father’s death and
      the oppression of the military order. 47


      46 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxviii. p. 1330. The abridgment of
      Xiphilin, though less particular, is in this place clearer than
      the original.]


      461 (return) [ As soon as this princess heard of the death of
      Caracalla, she wished to starve herself to death: the respect
      shown to her by Macrinus, in making no change in her attendants
      or her court, induced her to prolong her life. But it appears, as
      far as the mutilated text of Dion and the imperfect epitome of
      Xiphilin permit us to judge, that she conceived projects of
      ambition, and endeavored to raise herself to the empire. She
      wished to tread in the steps of Semiramis and Nitocris, whose
      country bordered on her own. Macrinus sent her an order
      immediately to leave Antioch, and to retire wherever she chose.
      She returned to her former purpose, and starved herself to
      death.—G.]


      462 (return) [ He inherited this name from his great-grandfather
      of the mother’s side, Bassianus, father of Julia Mæsa, his
      grandmother, and of Julia Domna, wife of Severus. Victor (in his
      epitome) is perhaps the only historian who has given the key to
      this genealogy, when speaking of Caracalla. His Bassianus ex avi
      materni nomine dictus. Caracalla, Elagabalus, and Alexander
      Seyerus, bore successively this name.—G.]


      47 (return) [ According to Lampridius, (Hist. August. p. 135,)
      Alexander Severus lived twenty-nine years three months and seven
      days. As he was killed March 19, 235, he was born December 12,
      205 and was consequently about this time thirteen years old, as
      his elder cousin might be about seventeen. This computation suits
      much better the history of the young princes than that of
      Herodian, (l. v. p. 181,) who represents them as three years
      younger; whilst, by an opposite error of chronology, he lengthens
      the reign of Elagabalus two years beyond its real duration. For
      the particulars of the conspiracy, see Dion, l. lxxviii. p. 1339.
      Herodian, l. v. p. 184.]


      Whilst a conspiracy of women and eunuchs was concerted with
      prudence, and conducted with rapid vigor, Macrinus, who, by a
      decisive motion, might have crushed his infant enemy, floated
      between the opposite extremes of terror and security, which alike
      fixed him inactive at Antioch. A spirit of rebellion diffused
      itself through all the camps and garrisons of Syria, successive
      detachments murdered their officers, 48 and joined the party of
      the rebels; and the tardy restitution of military pay and
      privileges was imputed to the acknowledged weakness of Macrinus.
      At length he marched out of Antioch, to meet the increasing and
      zealous army of the young pretender. His own troops seemed to
      take the field with faintness and reluctance; but, in the heat of
      the battle, 49 the Prætorian guards, almost by an involuntary
      impulse, asserted the superiority of their valor and discipline.
      The rebel ranks were broken; when the mother and grandmother of
      the Syrian prince, who, according to their eastern custom, had
      attended the army, threw themselves from their covered chariots,
      and, by exciting the compassion of the soldiers, endeavored to
      animate their drooping courage. Antoninus himself, who, in the
      rest of his life, never acted like a man, in this important
      crisis of his fate, approved himself a hero, mounted his horse,
      and, at the head of his rallied troops, charged sword in hand
      among the thickest of the enemy; whilst the eunuch Gannys, 491
      whose occupations had been confined to female cares and the soft
      luxury of Asia, displayed the talents of an able and experienced
      general. The battle still raged with doubtful violence, and
      Macrinus might have obtained the victory, had he not betrayed his
      own cause by a shameful and precipitate flight. His cowardice
      served only to protract his life a few days, and to stamp
      deserved ignominy on his misfortunes. It is scarcely necessary to
      add, that his son Diadumenianus was involved in the same fate.


      As soon as the stubborn Prætorians could be convinced that they
      fought for a prince who had basely deserted them, they
      surrendered to the conqueror: the contending parties of the Roman
      army, mingling tears of joy and tenderness, united under the
      banners of the imagined son of Caracalla, and the East
      acknowledged with pleasure the first emperor of Asiatic
      extraction.


      48 (return) [ By a most dangerous proclamation of the pretended
      Antoninus, every soldier who brought in his officer’s head became
      entitled to his private estate, as well as to his military
      commission.]


      49 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxviii. p. 1345. Herodian, l. v. p. 186.
      The battle was fought near the village of Immæ, about
      two-and-twenty miles from Antioch.]


      491 (return) [ Gannys was not a eunuch. Dion, p. 1355.—W]


      The letters of Macrinus had condescended to inform the senate of
      the slight disturbance occasioned by an impostor in Syria, and a
      decree immediately passed, declaring the rebel and his family
      public enemies; with a promise of pardon, however, to such of his
      deluded adherents as should merit it by an immediate return to
      their duty. During the twenty days that elapsed from the
      declaration of the victory of Antoninus (for in so short an
      interval was the fate of the Roman world decided,) the capital
      and the provinces, more especially those of the East, were
      distracted with hopes and fears, agitated with tumult, and
      stained with a useless effusion of civil blood, since whosoever
      of the rivals prevailed in Syria must reign over the empire. The
      specious letters in which the young conqueror announced his
      victory to the obedient senate were filled with professions of
      virtue and moderation; the shining examples of Marcus and
      Augustus, he should ever consider as the great rule of his
      administration; and he affected to dwell with pride on the
      striking resemblance of his own age and fortunes with those of
      Augustus, who in the earliest youth had revenged, by a successful
      war, the murder of his father. By adopting the style of Marcus
      Aurelius Antoninus, son of Antoninus and grandson of Severus, he
      tacitly asserted his hereditary claim to the empire; but, by
      assuming the tribunitian and proconsular powers before they had
      been conferred on him by a decree of the senate, he offended the
      delicacy of Roman prejudice. This new and injudicious violation
      of the constitution was probably dictated either by the ignorance
      of his Syrian courtiers, or the fierce disdain of his military
      followers. 50


      50 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1353.]


      As the attention of the new emperor was diverted by the most
      trifling amusements, he wasted many months in his luxurious
      progress from Syria to Italy, passed at Nicomedia his first
      winter after his victory, and deferred till the ensuing summer
      his triumphal entry into the capital. A faithful picture,
      however, which preceded his arrival, and was placed by his
      immediate order over the altar of Victory in the senate house,
      conveyed to the Romans the just but unworthy resemblance of his
      person and manners. He was drawn in his sacerdotal robes of silk
      and gold, after the loose flowing fashion of the Medes and
      Phœnicians; his head was covered with a lofty tiara, his numerous
      collars and bracelets were adorned with gems of an inestimable
      value. His eyebrows were tinged with black, and his cheeks
      painted with an artificial red and white. 51 The grave senators
      confessed with a sigh, that, after having long experienced the
      stern tyranny of their own countrymen, Rome was at length humbled
      beneath the effeminate luxury of Oriental despotism.


      51 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1363. Herodian, l. v. p. 189.]


      The Sun was worshipped at Emesa, under the name of Elagabalus, 52
      and under the form of a black conical stone, which, as it was
      universally believed, had fallen from heaven on that sacred
      place. To this protecting deity, Antoninus, not without some
      reason, ascribed his elevation to the throne. The display of
      superstitious gratitude was the only serious business of his
      reign. The triumph of the god of Emesa over all the religions of
      the earth, was the great object of his zeal and vanity; and the
      appellation of Elagabalus (for he presumed as pontiff and
      favorite to adopt that sacred name) was dearer to him than all
      the titles of Imperial greatness. In a solemn procession through
      the streets of Rome, the way was strewed with gold dust; the
      black stone, set in precious gems, was placed on a chariot drawn
      by six milk-white horses richly caparisoned. The pious emperor
      held the reins, and, supported by his ministers, moved slowly
      backwards, that he might perpetually enjoy the felicity of the
      divine presence. In a magnificent temple raised on the Palatine
      Mount, the sacrifices of the god Elagabalus were celebrated with
      every circumstance of cost and solemnity. The richest wines, the
      most extraordinary victims, and the rarest aromatics, were
      profusely consumed on his altar. Around the altar, a chorus of
      Syrian damsels performed their lascivious dances to the sound of
      barbarian music, whilst the gravest personages of the state and
      army, clothed in long Phœnician tunics, officiated in the meanest
      functions, with affected zeal and secret indignation. 53


      52 (return) [ This name is derived by the learned from two Syrian
      words, Ela a God, and Gabal, to form, the forming or plastic god,
      a proper, and even happy epithet for the sun. Wotton’s History of
      Rome, p. 378 Note: The name of Elagabalus has been disfigured in
      various ways. Herodian calls him; Lampridius, and the more modern
      writers, make him Heliogabalus. Dion calls him Elegabalus; but
      Elegabalus was the true name, as it appears on the medals.
      (Eckhel. de Doct. num. vet. t. vii. p. 250.) As to its etymology,
      that which Gibbon adduces is given by Bochart, Chan. ii. 5; but
      Salmasius, on better grounds. (not. in Lamprid. in Elagab.,)
      derives the name of Elagabalus from the idol of that god,
      represented by Herodian and the medals in the form of a mountain,
      (gibel in Hebrew,) or great stone cut to a point, with marks
      which represent the sun. As it was not permitted, at Hierapolis,
      in Syria, to make statues of the sun and moon, because, it was
      said, they are themselves sufficiently visible, the sun was
      represented at Emesa in the form of a great stone, which, as it
      appeared, had fallen from heaven. Spanheim, Cæsar. notes, p.
      46.—G. The name of Elagabalus, in “nummis rarius legetur.”
      Rasche, Lex. Univ. Ref. Numm. Rasche quotes two.—M]


      53 (return) [ Herodian, l. v. p. 190.]


      Chapter VI: Death Of Severus, Tyranny Of Caracalla, Usurpation Of
      Marcinus.—Part III.


      To this temple, as to the common centre of religious worship, the
      Imperial fanatic attempted to remove the Ancilia, the Palladium,
      54 and all the sacred pledges of the faith of Numa. A crowd of
      inferior deities attended in various stations the majesty of the
      god of Emesa; but his court was still imperfect, till a female of
      distinguished rank was admitted to his bed. Pallas had been first
      chosen for his consort; but as it was dreaded lest her warlike
      terrors might affright the soft delicacy of a Syrian deity, the
      Moon, adored by the Africans under the name of Astarte, was
      deemed a more suitable companion for the Sun. Her image, with the
      rich offerings of her temple as a marriage portion, was
      transported with solemn pomp from Carthage to Rome, and the day
      of these mystic nuptials was a general festival in the capital
      and throughout the empire. 55


      54 (return) [ He broke into the sanctuary of Vesta, and carried
      away a statue, which he supposed to be the palladium; but the
      vestals boasted that, by a pious fraud, they had imposed a
      counterfeit image on the profane intruder. Hist. August., p.
      103.]


      55 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1360. Herodian, l. v. p. 193.
      The subjects of the empire were obliged to make liberal presents
      to the new married couple; and whatever they had promised during
      the life of Elagabalus was carefully exacted under the
      administration of Mamæa.]


      A rational voluptuary adheres with invariable respect to the
      temperate dictates of nature, and improves the gratifications of
      sense by social intercourse, endearing connections, and the soft
      coloring of taste and the imagination. But Elagabalus, (I speak
      of the emperor of that name,) corrupted by his youth, his
      country, and his fortune, abandoned himself to the grossest
      pleasures with ungoverned fury, and soon found disgust and
      satiety in the midst of his enjoyments. The inflammatory powers
      of art were summoned to his aid: the confused multitude of women,
      of wines, and of dishes, and the studied variety of attitude and
      sauces, served to revive his languid appetites. New terms and new
      inventions in these sciences, the only ones cultivated and
      patronized by the monarch, 56 signalized his reign, and
      transmitted his infamy to succeeding times. A capricious
      prodigality supplied the want of taste and elegance; and whilst
      Elagabalus lavished away the treasures of his people in the
      wildest extravagance, his own voice and that of his flatterers
      applauded a spirit of magnificence unknown to the tameness of his
      predecessors. To confound the order of seasons and climates, 57
      to sport with the passions and prejudices of his subjects, and to
      subvert every law of nature and decency, were in the number of
      his most delicious amusements. A long train of concubines, and a
      rapid succession of wives, among whom was a vestal virgin,
      ravished by force from her sacred asylum, 58 were insufficient to
      satisfy the impotence of his passions. The master of the Roman
      world affected to copy the dress and manners of the female sex,
      preferred the distaff to the sceptre, and dishonored the
      principal dignities of the empire by distributing them among his
      numerous lovers; one of whom was publicly invested with the title
      and authority of the emperor’s, or, as he more properly styled
      himself, of the empress’s husband. 59


      56 (return) [ The invention of a new sauce was liberally
      rewarded; but if it was not relished, the inventor was confined
      to eat of nothing else till he had discovered another more
      agreeable to the Imperial palate Hist. August. p. 111.]


      57 (return) [ He never would eat sea-fish except at a great
      distance from the sea; he then would distribute vast quantities
      of the rarest sorts, brought at an immense expense, to the
      peasants of the inland country. Hist. August. p. 109.]


      58 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1358. Herodian, l. v. p. 192.]


      59 (return) [ Hierocles enjoyed that honor; but he would have
      been supplanted by one Zoticus, had he not contrived, by a
      potion, to enervate the powers of his rival, who, being found on
      trial unequal to his reputation, was driven with ignominy from
      the palace. Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1363, 1364. A dancer was made
      præfect of the city, a charioteer præfect of the watch, a barber
      præfect of the provisions. These three ministers, with many
      inferior officers, were all recommended enormitate membrorum.
      Hist. August. p. 105.]


      It may seem probable, the vices and follies of Elagabalus have
      been adorned by fancy, and blackened by prejudice. 60 Yet,
      confining ourselves to the public scenes displayed before the
      Roman people, and attested by grave and contemporary historians,
      their inexpressible infamy surpasses that of any other age or
      country. The license of an eastern monarch is secluded from the
      eye of curiosity by the inaccessible walls of his seraglio. The
      sentiments of honor and gallantry have introduced a refinement of
      pleasure, a regard for decency, and a respect for the public
      opinion, into the modern courts of Europe; 601 but the corrupt
      and opulent nobles of Rome gratified every vice that could be
      collected from the mighty conflux of nations and manners. Secure
      of impunity, careless of censure, they lived without restraint in
      the patient and humble society of their slaves and parasites. The
      emperor, in his turn, viewing every rank of his subjects with the
      same contemptuous indifference, asserted without control his
      sovereign privilege of lust and luxury.


      60 (return) [ Even the credulous compiler of his life, in the
      Augustan History (p. 111) is inclined to suspect that his vices
      may have been exaggerated.]


      601 (return) [ Wenck has justly observed that Gibbon should have
      reckoned the influence of Christianity in this great change. In
      the most savage times, and the most corrupt courts, since the
      introduction of Christianity there have been no Neros or
      Domitians, no Commodus or Elagabalus.—M.]


      The most worthless of mankind are not afraid to condemn in others
      the same disorders which they allow in themselves; and can
      readily discover some nice difference of age, character, or
      station, to justify the partial distinction. The licentious
      soldiers, who had raised to the throne the dissolute son of
      Caracalla, blushed at their ignominious choice, and turned with
      disgust from that monster, to contemplate with pleasure the
      opening virtues of his cousin Alexander, the son of Mamæa. The
      crafty Mæsa, sensible that her grandson Elagabalus must
      inevitably destroy himself by his own vices, had provided another
      and surer support of her family. Embracing a favorable moment of
      fondness and devotion, she had persuaded the young emperor to
      adopt Alexander, and to invest him with the title of Cæsar, that
      his own divine occupations might be no longer interrupted by the
      care of the earth. In the second rank that amiable prince soon
      acquired the affections of the public, and excited the tyrant’s
      jealousy, who resolved to terminate the dangerous competition,
      either by corrupting the manners, or by taking away the life, of
      his rival. His arts proved unsuccessful; his vain designs were
      constantly discovered by his own loquacious folly, and
      disappointed by those virtuous and faithful servants whom the
      prudence of Mamæa had placed about the person of her son. In a
      hasty sally of passion, Elagabalus resolved to execute by force
      what he had been unable to compass by fraud, and by a despotic
      sentence degraded his cousin from the rank and honors of Cæsar.
      The message was received in the senate with silence, and in the
      camp with fury. The Prætorian guards swore to protect Alexander,
      and to revenge the dishonored majesty of the throne. The tears
      and promises of the trembling Elagabalus, who only begged them to
      spare his life, and to leave him in the possession of his beloved
      Hierocles, diverted their just indignation; and they contented
      themselves with empowering their præfects to watch over the
      safety of Alexander, and the conduct of the emperor. 61


      61 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1365. Herodian, l. v. p.
      195—201. Hist. August. p. 105. The last of the three historians
      seems to have followed the best authors in his account of the
      revolution.]


      It was impossible that such a reconciliation should last, or that
      even the mean soul of Elagabalus could hold an empire on such
      humiliating terms of dependence. He soon attempted, by a
      dangerous experiment, to try the temper of the soldiers. The
      report of the death of Alexander, and the natural suspicion that
      he had been murdered, inflamed their passions into fury, and the
      tempest of the camp could only be appeased by the presence and
      authority of the popular youth. Provoked at this new instance of
      their affection for his cousin, and their contempt for his
      person, the emperor ventured to punish some of the leaders of the
      mutiny. His unseasonable severity proved instantly fatal to his
      minions, his mother, and himself. Elagabalus was massacred by the
      indignant Prætorians, his mutilated corpse dragged through the
      streets of the city, and thrown into the Tiber. His memory was
      branded with eternal infamy by the senate; the justice of whose
      decree has been ratified by posterity. 62


      62 (return) [ The æra of the death of Elagabalus, and of the
      accession of Alexander, has employed the learning and ingenuity
      of Pagi, Tillemont, Valsecchi, Vignoli, and Torre, bishop of
      Adria. The question is most assuredly intricate; but I still
      adhere to the authority of Dion, the truth of whose calculations
      is undeniable, and the purity of whose text is justified by the
      agreement of Xiphilin, Zonaras, and Cedrenus. Elagabalus reigned
      three years nine months and four days, from his victory over
      Macrinus, and was killed March 10, 222. But what shall we reply
      to the medals, undoubtedly genuine, which reckon the fifth year
      of his tribunitian power? We shall reply, with the learned
      Valsecchi, that the usurpation of Macrinus was annihilated, and
      that the son of Caracalla dated his reign from his father’s
      death? After resolving this great difficulty, the smaller knots
      of this question may be easily untied, or cut asunder. Note: This
      opinion of Valsecchi has been triumphantly contested by Eckhel,
      who has shown the impossibility of reconciling it with the medals
      of Elagabalus, and has given the most satisfactory explanation of
      the five tribunates of that emperor. He ascended the throne and
      received the tribunitian power the 16th of May, in the year of
      Rome 971; and on the 1st January of the next year, 972, he began
      a new tribunate, according to the custom established by preceding
      emperors. During the years 972, 973, 974, he enjoyed the
      tribunate, and commenced his fifth in the year 975, during which
      he was killed on the 10th March. Eckhel de Doct. Num. viii. 430
      &c.—G.]


      In the room of Elagabalus, his cousin Alexander was raised to the
      throne by the Prætorian guards. His relation to the family of
      Severus, whose name he assumed, was the same as that of his
      predecessor; his virtue and his danger had already endeared him
      to the Romans, and the eager liberality of the senate conferred
      upon him, in one day, the various titles and powers of the
      Imperial dignity. 63 But as Alexander was a modest and dutiful
      youth, of only seventeen years of age, the reins of government
      were in the hands of two women, of his mother, Mamæa, and of
      Mæsa, his grandmother. After the death of the latter, who
      survived but a short time the elevation of Alexander, Mamæa
      remained the sole regent of her son and of the empire.


      63 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 114. By this unusual
      precipitation, the senate meant to confound the hopes of
      pretenders, and prevent the factions of the armies.]


      In every age and country, the wiser, or at least the stronger, of
      the two sexes, has usurped the powers of the state, and confined
      the other to the cares and pleasures of domestic life. In
      hereditary monarchies, however, and especially in those of modern
      Europe, the gallant spirit of chivalry, and the law of
      succession, have accustomed us to allow a singular exception; and
      a woman is often acknowledged the absolute sovereign of a great
      kingdom, in which she would be deemed incapable of exercising the
      smallest employment, civil or military. But as the Roman emperors
      were still considered as the generals and magistrates of the
      republic, their wives and mothers, although distinguished by the
      name of Augusta, were never associated to their personal honors;
      and a female reign would have appeared an inexpiable prodigy in
      the eyes of those primitive Romans, who married without love, or
      loved without delicacy and respect. 64 The haughty Agrippina
      aspired, indeed, to share the honors of the empire which she had
      conferred on her son; but her mad ambition, detested by every
      citizen who felt for the dignity of Rome, was disappointed by the
      artful firmness of Seneca and Burrhus. 65 The good sense, or the
      indifference, of succeeding princes, restrained them from
      offending the prejudices of their subjects; and it was reserved
      for the profligate Elagabalus to discharge the acts of the senate
      with the name of his mother Soæmias, who was placed by the side
      of the consuls, and subscribed, as a regular member, the decrees
      of the legislative assembly. Her more prudent sister, Mamæa,
      declined the useless and odious prerogative, and a solemn law was
      enacted, excluding women forever from the senate, and devoting to
      the infernal gods the head of the wretch by whom this sanction
      should be violated. 66 The substance, not the pageantry, of power
      was the object of Mamæa’s manly ambition. She maintained an
      absolute and lasting empire over the mind of her son, and in his
      affection the mother could not brook a rival. Alexander, with her
      consent, married the daughter of a patrician; but his respect for
      his father-in-law, and love for the empress, were inconsistent
      with the tenderness of interest of Mamæa. The patrician was
      executed on the ready accusation of treason, and the wife of
      Alexander driven with ignominy from the palace, and banished into
      Africa. 67


      64 (return) [ Metellus Numidicus, the censor, acknowledged to the
      Roman people, in a public oration, that had kind nature allowed
      us to exist without the help of women, we should be delivered
      from a very troublesome companion; and he could recommend
      matrimony only as the sacrifice of private pleasure to public
      duty. Aulus Gellius, i. 6.]


      65 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xiii. 5.]


      66 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 102, 107.]


      67 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxx. p. 1369. Herodian, l. vi. p. 206.
      Hist. August. p. 131. Herodian represents the patrician as
      innocent. The Augustian History, on the authority of Dexippus,
      condemns him, as guilty of a conspiracy against the life of
      Alexander. It is impossible to pronounce between them; but Dion
      is an irreproachable witness of the jealousy and cruelty of Mamæa
      towards the young empress, whose hard fate Alexander lamented,
      but durst not oppose.]


      Notwithstanding this act of jealous cruelty, as well as some
      instances of avarice, with which Mamæa is charged, the general
      tenor of her administration was equally for the benefit of her
      son and of the empire. With the approbation of the senate, she
      chose sixteen of the wisest and most virtuous senators as a
      perpetual council of state, before whom every public business of
      moment was debated and determined. The celebrated Ulpian, equally
      distinguished by his knowledge of, and his respect for, the laws
      of Rome, was at their head; and the prudent firmness of this
      aristocracy restored order and authority to the government. As
      soon as they had purged the city from foreign superstition and
      luxury, the remains of the capricious tyranny of Elagabalus, they
      applied themselves to remove his worthless creatures from every
      department of the public administration, and to supply their
      places with men of virtue and ability. Learning, and the love of
      justice, became the only recommendations for civil offices;
      valor, and the love of discipline, the only qualifications for
      military employments. 68


      68 (return) [ Herodian, l. vi. p. 203. Hist. August. p. 119. The
      latter insinuates, that when any law was to be passed, the
      council was assisted by a number of able lawyers and experienced
      senators, whose opinions were separately given, and taken down in
      writing.]


      But the most important care of Mamæa and her wise counsellors,
      was to form the character of the young emperor, on whose personal
      qualities the happiness or misery of the Roman world must
      ultimately depend. The fortunate soil assisted, and even
      prevented, the hand of cultivation. An excellent understanding
      soon convinced Alexander of the advantages of virtue, the
      pleasure of knowledge, and the necessity of labor. A natural
      mildness and moderation of temper preserved him from the assaults
      of passion, and the allurements of vice. His unalterable regard
      for his mother, and his esteem for the wise Ulpian, guarded his
      unexperienced youth from the poison of flattery. 581


      581 (return) [ Alexander received into his chapel all the
      religions which prevailed in the empire; he admitted Jesus
      Christ, Abraham, Orpheus, Apollonius of Tyana, &c. It was almost
      certain that his mother Mamæa had instructed him in the morality
      of Christianity. Historians in general agree in calling her a
      Christian; there is reason to believe that she had begun to have
      a taste for the principles of Christianity. (See Tillemont,
      Alexander Severus) Gibbon has not noticed this circumstance; he
      appears to have wished to lower the character of this empress; he
      has throughout followed the narrative of Herodian, who, by the
      acknowledgment of Capitolinus himself, detested Alexander.
      Without believing the exaggerated praises of Lampridius, he ought
      not to have followed the unjust severity of Herodian, and, above
      all, not to have forgotten to say that the virtuous Alexander
      Severus had insured to the Jews the preservation of their
      privileges, and permitted the exercise of Christianity. Hist.
      Aug. p. 121. The Christians had established their worship in a
      public place, of which the victuallers (cauponarii) claimed, not
      the property, but possession by custom. Alexander answered, that
      it was better that the place should be used for the service of
      God, in any form, than for victuallers.—G. I have scrupled to
      omit this note, as it contains some points worthy of notice; but
      it is very unjust to Gibbon, who mentions almost all the
      circumstances, which he is accused of omitting, in another, and,
      according to his plan, a better place, and, perhaps, in stronger
      terms than M. Guizot. See Chap. xvi.— M.]


      The simple journal of his ordinary occupations exhibits a
      pleasing picture of an accomplished emperor, 69 and, with some
      allowance for the difference of manners, might well deserve the
      imitation of modern princes. Alexander rose early: the first
      moments of the day were consecrated to private devotion, and his
      domestic chapel was filled with the images of those heroes, who,
      by improving or reforming human life, had deserved the grateful
      reverence of posterity. But as he deemed the service of mankind
      the most acceptable worship of the gods, the greatest part of his
      morning hours was employed in his council, where he discussed
      public affairs, and determined private causes, with a patience
      and discretion above his years. The dryness of business was
      relieved by the charms of literature; and a portion of time was
      always set apart for his favorite studies of poetry, history, and
      philosophy. The works of Virgil and Horace, the republics of
      Plato and Cicero, formed his taste, enlarged his understanding,
      and gave him the noblest ideas of man and government. The
      exercises of the body succeeded to those of the mind; and
      Alexander, who was tall, active, and robust, surpassed most of
      his equals in the gymnastic arts. Refreshed by the use of the
      bath and a slight dinner, he resumed, with new vigor, the
      business of the day; and, till the hour of supper, the principal
      meal of the Romans, he was attended by his secretaries, with whom
      he read and answered the multitude of letters, memorials, and
      petitions, that must have been addressed to the master of the
      greatest part of the world. His table was served with the most
      frugal simplicity, and whenever he was at liberty to consult his
      own inclination, the company consisted of a few select friends,
      men of learning and virtue, amongst whom Ulpian was constantly
      invited. Their conversation was familiar and instructive; and the
      pauses were occasionally enlivened by the recital of some
      pleasing composition, which supplied the place of the dancers,
      comedians, and even gladiators, so frequently summoned to the
      tables of the rich and luxurious Romans. 70 The dress of
      Alexander was plain and modest, his demeanor courteous and
      affable: at the proper hours his palace was open to all his
      subjects, but the voice of a crier was heard, as in the
      Eleusinian mysteries, pronouncing the same salutary admonition:
      “Let none enter these holy walls, unless he is conscious of a
      pure and innocent mind.” 71


      69 (return) [ See his life in the Augustan History. The
      undistinguishing compiler has buried these interesting anecdotes
      under a load of trivial unmeaning circumstances.]


      70 (return) [ See the 13th Satire of Juvenal.]


      71 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 119.]


      Such a uniform tenor of life, which left not a moment for vice or
      folly, is a better proof of the wisdom and justice of Alexander’s
      government, than all the trifling details preserved in the
      compilation of Lampridius. Since the accession of Commodus, the
      Roman world had experienced, during the term of forty years, the
      successive and various vices of four tyrants. From the death of
      Elagabalus, it enjoyed an auspicious calm of thirteen years. 711
      The provinces, relieved from the oppressive taxes invented by
      Caracalla and his pretended son, flourished in peace and
      prosperity, under the administration of magistrates who were
      convinced by experience that to deserve the love of the subjects
      was their best and only method of obtaining the favor of their
      sovereign. While some gentle restraints were imposed on the
      innocent luxury of the Roman people, the price of provisions and
      the interest of money, were reduced by the paternal care of
      Alexander, whose prudent liberality, without distressing the
      industrious, supplied the wants and amusements of the populace.
      The dignity, the freedom, the authority of the senate was
      restored; and every virtuous senator might approach the person of
      the emperor without a fear and without a blush.


      711 (return) [ Wenck observes that Gibbon, enchanted with the
      virtue of Alexander has heightened, particularly in this
      sentence, its effect on the state of the world. His own account,
      which follows, of the insurrections and foreign wars, is not in
      harmony with this beautiful picture.—M.]


      The name of Antoninus, ennobled by the virtues of Pius and
      Marcus, had been communicated by adoption to the dissolute Verus,
      and by descent to the cruel Commodus. It became the honorable
      appellation of the sons of Severus, was bestowed on young
      Diadumenianus, and at length prostituted to the infamy of the
      high priest of Emesa. Alexander, though pressed by the studied,
      and, perhaps, sincere importunity of the senate, nobly refused
      the borrowed lustre of a name; whilst in his whole conduct he
      labored to restore the glories and felicity of the age of the
      genuine Antonines. 72


      72 (return) [ See, in the Hist. August. p. 116, 117, the whole
      contest between Alexander and the senate, extracted from the
      journals of that assembly. It happened on the sixth of March,
      probably of the year 223, when the Romans had enjoyed, almost a
      twelvemonth, the blessings of his reign. Before the appellation
      of Antoninus was offered him as a title of honor, the senate
      waited to see whether Alexander would not assume it as a family
      name.]


      In the civil administration of Alexander, wisdom was enforced by
      power, and the people, sensible of the public felicity, repaid
      their benefactor with their love and gratitude. There still
      remained a greater, a more necessary, but a more difficult
      enterprise; the reformation of the military order, whose interest
      and temper, confirmed by long impunity, rendered them impatient
      of the restraints of discipline, and careless of the blessings of
      public tranquillity. In the execution of his design, the emperor
      affected to display his love, and to conceal his fear of the
      army. The most rigid economy in every other branch of the
      administration supplied a fund of gold and silver for the
      ordinary pay and the extraordinary rewards of the troops. In
      their marches he relaxed the severe obligation of carrying
      seventeen days’ provision on their shoulders. Ample magazines
      were formed along the public roads, and as soon as they entered
      the enemy’s country, a numerous train of mules and camels waited
      on their haughty laziness. As Alexander despaired of correcting
      the luxury of his soldiers, he attempted, at least, to direct it
      to objects of martial pomp and ornament, fine horses, splendid
      armor, and shields enriched with silver and gold. He shared
      whatever fatigues he was obliged to impose, visited, in person,
      the sick and wounded, preserved an exact register of their
      services and his own gratitude, and expressed on every occasion,
      the warmest regard for a body of men, whose welfare, as he
      affected to declare, was so closely connected with that of the
      state. 73 By the most gentle arts he labored to inspire the
      fierce multitude with a sense of duty, and to restore at least a
      faint image of that discipline to which the Romans owed their
      empire over so many other nations, as warlike and more powerful
      than themselves. But his prudence was vain, his courage fatal,
      and the attempt towards a reformation served only to inflame the
      ills it was meant to cure.


      73 (return) [ It was a favorite saying of the emperor’s Se
      milites magis servare, quam seipsum, quod salus publica in his
      esset. Hist. Aug. p. 130.]


      The Prætorian guards were attached to the youth of Alexander.
      They loved him as a tender pupil, whom they had saved from a
      tyrant’s fury, and placed on the Imperial throne. That amiable
      prince was sensible of the obligation; but as his gratitude was
      restrained within the limits of reason and justice, they soon
      were more dissatisfied with the virtues of Alexander, than they
      had ever been with the vices of Elagabalus. Their præfect, the
      wise Ulpian, was the friend of the laws and of the people; he was
      considered as the enemy of the soldiers, and to his pernicious
      counsels every scheme of reformation was imputed. Some trifling
      accident blew up their discontent into a furious mutiny; and the
      civil war raged, during three days, in Rome, whilst the life of
      that excellent minister was defended by the grateful people.
      Terrified, at length, by the sight of some houses in flames, and
      by the threats of a general conflagration, the people yielded
      with a sigh, and left the virtuous but unfortunate Ulpian to his
      fate. He was pursued into the Imperial palace, and massacred at
      the feet of his master, who vainly strove to cover him with the
      purple, and to obtain his pardon from the inexorable soldiers.
      731 Such was the deplorable weakness of government, that the
      emperor was unable to revenge his murdered friend and his
      insulted dignity, without stooping to the arts of patience and
      dissimulation. Epagathus, the principal leader of the mutiny, was
      removed from Rome, by the honorable employment of præfect of
      Egypt: from that high rank he was gently degraded to the
      government of Crete; and when at length, his popularity among the
      guards was effaced by time and absence, Alexander ventured to
      inflict the tardy but deserved punishment of his crimes. 74 Under
      the reign of a just and virtuous prince, the tyranny of the army
      threatened with instant death his most faithful ministers, who
      were suspected of an intention to correct their intolerable
      disorders. The historian Dion Cassius had commanded the Pannonian
      legions with the spirit of ancient discipline. Their brethren of
      Rome, embracing the common cause of military license, demanded
      the head of the reformer. Alexander, however, instead of yielding
      to their seditious clamors, showed a just sense of his merit and
      services, by appointing him his colleague in the consulship, and
      defraying from his own treasury the expense of that vain dignity:
      but as was justly apprehended, that if the soldiers beheld him
      with the ensigns of his office, they would revenge the insult in
      his blood, the nominal first magistrate of the state retired, by
      the emperor’s advice, from the city, and spent the greatest part
      of his consulship at his villas in Campania. 75 751


      731 (return) [ Gibbon has confounded two events altogether
      different— the quarrel of the people with the Prætorians, which
      lasted three days, and the assassination of Ulpian by the latter.
      Dion relates first the death of Ulpian, afterwards, reverting
      back according to a manner which is usual with him, he says that
      during the life of Ulpian, there had been a war of three days
      between the Prætorians and the people. But Ulpian was not the
      cause. Dion says, on the contrary, that it was occasioned by some
      unimportant circumstance; whilst he assigns a weighty reason for
      the murder of Ulpian, the judgment by which that Prætorian
      præfect had condemned his predecessors, Chrestus and Flavian, to
      death, whom the soldiers wished to revenge. Zosimus (l. 1, c.
      xi.) attributes this sentence to Mamæra; but, even then, the
      troops might have imputed it to Ulpian, who had reaped all the
      advantage and was otherwise odious to them.—W.]


      74 (return) [ Though the author of the life of Alexander (Hist.
      August. p. 182) mentions the sedition raised against Ulpian by
      the soldiers, he conceals the catastrophe, as it might discover a
      weakness in the administration of his hero. From this designed
      omission, we may judge of the weight and candor of that author.]


      75 (return) [ For an account of Ulpian’s fate and his own danger,
      see the mutilated conclusion of Dion’s History, l. lxxx. p.
      1371.]


      751 (return) [ Dion possessed no estates in Campania, and was not
      rich. He only says that the emperor advised him to reside, during
      his consulate, in some place out of Rome; that he returned to
      Rome after the end of his consulate, and had an interview with
      the emperor in Campania. He asked and obtained leave to pass the
      rest of his life in his native city, (Nice, in Bithynia: ) it was
      there that he finished his history, which closes with his second
      consulship.—W.]


      Chapter VI: Death Of Severus, Tyranny Of Caracalla, Usurpation Of
      Marcinus.—Part IV.


      The lenity of the emperor confirmed the insolence of the troops;
      the legions imitated the example of the guards, and defended
      their prerogative of licentiousness with the same furious
      obstinacy. The administration of Alexander was an unavailing
      struggle against the corruption of his age. In llyricum, in
      Mauritania, in Armenia, in Mesopotamia, in Germany, fresh
      mutinies perpetually broke out; his officers were murdered, his
      authority was insulted, and his life at last sacrificed to the
      fierce discontents of the army. 76 One particular fact well
      deserves to be recorded, as it illustrates the manners of the
      troops, and exhibits a singular instance of their return to a
      sense of duty and obedience. Whilst the emperor lay at Antioch,
      in his Persian expedition, the particulars of which we shall
      hereafter relate, the punishment of some soldiers, who had been
      discovered in the baths of women, excited a sedition in the
      legion to which they belonged. Alexander ascended his tribunal,
      and with a modest firmness represented to the armed multitude the
      absolute necessity, as well as his inflexible resolution, of
      correcting the vices introduced by his impure predecessor, and of
      maintaining the discipline, which could not be relaxed without
      the ruin of the Roman name and empire. Their clamors interrupted
      his mild expostulation. “Reserve your shout,” said the undaunted
      emperor, “till you take the field against the Persians, the
      Germans, and the Sarmatians. Be silent in the presence of your
      sovereign and benefactor, who bestows upon you the corn, the
      clothing, and the money of the provinces. Be silent, or I shall
      no longer style you solders, but _citizens_, 77 if those indeed
      who disclaim the laws of Rome deserve to be ranked among the
      meanest of the people.” His menaces inflamed the fury of the
      legion, and their brandished arms already threatened his person.
      “Your courage,” resumed the intrepid Alexander, “would be more
      nobly displayed in the field of battle; _me_ you may destroy, you
      cannot intimidate; and the severe justice of the republic would
      punish your crime and revenge my death.” The legion still
      persisted in clamorous sedition, when the emperor pronounced,
      with a loud voice, the decisive sentence, “_Citizens!_ lay down
      your arms, and depart in peace to your respective habitations.”
      The tempest was instantly appeased: the soldiers, filled with
      grief and shame, silently confessed the justice of their
      punishment, and the power of discipline, yielded up their arms
      and military ensigns, and retired in confusion, not to their
      camp, but to the several inns of the city. Alexander enjoyed,
      during thirty days, the edifying spectacle of their repentance;
      nor did he restore them to their former rank in the army, till he
      had punished with death those tribunes whose connivance had
      occasioned the mutiny. The grateful legion served the emperor
      whilst living, and revenged him when dead. 78


      76 (return) [ Annot. Reimar. ad Dion Cassius, l. lxxx. p. 1369.]


      77 (return) [ Julius Cæsar had appeased a sedition with the same
      word, Quirites; which, thus opposed to soldiers, was used in a
      sense of contempt, and reduced the offenders to the less
      honorable condition of mere citizens. Tacit. Annal. i. 43.]


      78 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 132.]


      The resolutions of the multitude generally depend on a moment;
      and the caprice of passion might equally determine the seditious
      legion to lay down their arms at the emperor’s feet, or to plunge
      them into his breast. Perhaps, if this singular transaction had
      been investigated by the penetration of a philosopher, we should
      discover the secret causes which on that occasion authorized the
      boldness of the prince, and commanded the obedience of the
      troops; and perhaps, if it had been related by a judicious
      historian, we should find this action, worthy of Cæsar himself,
      reduced nearer to the level of probability and the common
      standard of the character of Alexander Severus. The abilities of
      that amiable prince seem to have been inadequate to the
      difficulties of his situation, the firmness of his conduct
      inferior to the purity of his intentions. His virtues, as well as
      the vices of Elagabalus, contracted a tincture of weakness and
      effeminacy from the soft climate of Syria, of which he was a
      native; though he blushed at his foreign origin, and listened
      with a vain complacency to the flattering genealogists, who
      derived his race from the ancient stock of Roman nobility. 79 The
      pride and avarice of his mother cast a shade on the glories of
      his reign; and by exacting from his riper years the same dutiful
      obedience which she had justly claimed from his unexperienced
      youth, Mamæa exposed to public ridicule both her son’s character
      and her own. 80 The fatigues of the Persian war irritated the
      military discontent; the unsuccessful event 801 degraded the
      reputation of the emperor as a general, and even as a soldier.
      Every cause prepared, and every circumstance hastened, a
      revolution, which distracted the Roman empire with a long series
      of intestine calamities.


      79 (return) [ From the Metelli. Hist. August. p. 119. The choice
      was judicious. In one short period of twelve years, the Metelli
      could reckon seven consulships and five triumphs. See Velleius
      Paterculus, ii. 11, and the Fasti.]


      80 (return) [ The life of Alexander, in the Augustan History, is
      the mere idea of a perfect prince, an awkward imitation of the
      Cyropædia. The account of his reign, as given by Herodian, is
      rational and moderate, consistent with the general history of the
      age; and, in some of the most invidious particulars, confirmed by
      the decisive fragments of Dion. Yet from a very paltry prejudice,
      the greater number of our modern writers abuse Herodian, and copy
      the Augustan History. See Mess de Tillemont and Wotton. From the
      opposite prejudice, the emperor Julian (in Cæsarib. p. 315)
      dwells with a visible satisfaction on the effeminate weakness of
      the Syrian, and the ridiculous avarice of his mother.]


      801 (return) [ Historians are divided as to the success of the
      campaign against the Persians; Herodian alone speaks of defeat.
      Lampridius, Eutropius, Victor, and others, say that it was very
      glorious to Alexander; that he beat Artaxerxes in a great battle,
      and repelled him from the frontiers of the empire. This much is
      certain, that Alexander, on his return to Rome, (Lamp. Hist. Aug.
      c. 56, 133, 134,) received the honors of a triumph, and that he
      said, in his oration to the people. Quirites, vicimus Persas,
      milites divites reduximus, vobis congiarium pollicemur, cras
      ludos circenses Persicos donabimus. Alexander, says Eckhel, had
      too much modesty and wisdom to permit himself to receive honors
      which ought only to be the reward of victory, if he had not
      deserved them; he would have contented himself with dissembling
      his losses. Eckhel, Doct. Num. vet. vii. 276. The medals
      represent him as in triumph; one, among others, displays him
      crowned by Victory between two rivers, the Euphrates and the
      Tigris. P. M. TR. P. xii. Cos. iii. PP. Imperator paludatus D.
      hastam. S. parazonium, stat inter duos fluvios humi jacentes, et
      ab accedente retro Victoria coronatur. Æ. max. mod. (Mus. Reg.
      Gall.) Although Gibbon treats this question more in detail when
      he speaks of the Persian monarchy, I have thought fit to place
      here what contradicts his opinion.—G]


      The dissolute tyranny of Commodus, the civil wars occasioned by
      his death, and the new maxims of policy introduced by the house
      of Severus, had all contributed to increase the dangerous power
      of the army, and to obliterate the faint image of laws and
      liberty that was still impressed on the minds of the Romans. The
      internal change, which undermined the foundations of the empire,
      we have endeavored to explain with some degree of order and
      perspicuity. The personal characters of the emperors, their
      victories, laws, follies, and fortunes, can interest us no
      farther than as they are connected with the general history of
      the Decline and Fall of the monarchy. Our constant attention to
      that great object will not suffer us to overlook a most important
      edict of Antoninus Caracalla, which communicated to all the free
      inhabitants of the empire the name and privileges of Roman
      citizens. His unbounded liberality flowed not, however, from the
      sentiments of a generous mind; it was the sordid result of
      avarice, and will naturally be illustrated by some observations
      on the finances of that state, from the victorious ages of the
      commonwealth to the reign of Alexander Severus.


      The siege of Veii in Tuscany, the first considerable enterprise
      of the Romans, was protracted to the tenth year, much less by the
      strength of the place than by the unskilfulness of the besiegers.
      The unaccustomed hardships of so many winter campaigns, at the
      distance of near twenty miles from home, 81 required more than
      common encouragements; and the senate wisely prevented the
      clamors of the people, by the institution of a regular pay for
      the soldiers, which was levied by a general tribute, assessed
      according to an equitable proportion on the property of the
      citizens. 82 During more than two hundred years after the
      conquest of Veii, the victories of the republic added less to the
      wealth than to the power of Rome. The states of Italy paid their
      tribute in military service only, and the vast force, both by sea
      and land, which was exerted in the Punic wars, was maintained at
      the expense of the Romans themselves. That high-spirited people
      (such is often the generous enthusiasm of freedom) cheerfully
      submitted to the most excessive but voluntary burdens, in the
      just confidence that they should speedily enjoy the rich harvest
      of their labors. Their expectations were not disappointed. In the
      course of a few years, the riches of Syracuse, of Carthage, of
      Macedonia, and of Asia, were brought in triumph to Rome. The
      treasures of Perseus alone amounted to near two millions
      sterling, and the Roman people, the sovereign of so many nations,
      was forever delivered from the weight of taxes. 83 The increasing
      revenue of the provinces was found sufficient to defray the
      ordinary establishment of war and government, and the superfluous
      mass of gold and silver was deposited in the temple of Saturn,
      and reserved for any unforeseen emergency of the state. 84


      81 (return) [ According to the more accurate Dionysius, the city
      itself was only a hundred stadia, or twelve miles and a half,
      from Rome, though some out-posts might be advanced farther on the
      side of Etruria. Nardini, in a professed treatise, has combated
      the popular opinion and the authority of two popes, and has
      removed Veii from Civita Castellana, to a little spot called
      Isola, in the midway between Rome and the Lake Bracianno. * Note:
      See the interesting account of the site and ruins of Veii in Sir
      W Gell’s topography of Rome and its Vicinity. v. ii. p. 303.—M.]


      82 (return) [ See the 4th and 5th books of Livy. In the Roman
      census, property, power, and taxation were commensurate with each
      other.]


      83 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. l. xxxiii. c. 3. Cicero de
      Offic. ii. 22. Plutarch, P. Æmil. p. 275.]


      84 (return) [ See a fine description of this accumulated wealth
      of ages in Phars. l. iii. v. 155, &c.]


      History has never, perhaps, suffered a greater or more
      irreparable injury than in the loss of the curious register 841
      bequeathed by Augustus to the senate, in which that experienced
      prince so accurately balanced the revenues and expenses of the
      Roman empire. 85 Deprived of this clear and comprehensive
      estimate, we are reduced to collect a few imperfect hints from
      such of the ancients as have accidentally turned aside from the
      splendid to the more useful parts of history. We are informed
      that, by the conquests of Pompey, the tributes of Asia were
      raised from fifty to one hundred and thirty-five millions of
      drachms; or about four millions and a half sterling. 86 861 Under
      the last and most indolent of the Ptolemies, the revenue of Egypt
      is said to have amounted to twelve thousand five hundred talents;
      a sum equivalent to more than two millions and a half of our
      money, but which was afterwards considerably improved by the more
      exact economy of the Romans, and the increase of the trade of
      Æthiopia and India. 87 Gaul was enriched by rapine, as Egypt was
      by commerce, and the tributes of those two great provinces have
      been compared as nearly equal to each other in value. 88 The ten
      thousand Euboic or Phœnician talents, about four millions
      sterling, 89 which vanquished Carthage was condemned to pay
      within the term of fifty years, were a slight acknowledgment of
      the superiority of Rome, 90 and cannot bear the least proportion
      with the taxes afterwards raised both on the lands and on the
      persons of the inhabitants, when the fertile coast of Africa was
      reduced into a province. 91


      841 (return) [ See Rationarium imperii. Compare besides Tacitus,
      Suet. Aug. c. ult. Dion, p. 832. Other emperors kept and
      published similar registers. See a dissertation of Dr. Wolle, de
      Rationario imperii Rom. Leipsig, 1773. The last book of Appian
      also contained the statistics of the Roman empire, but it is
      lost.—W.]


      85 (return) [ Tacit. in Annal. i. ll. It seems to have existed in
      the time of Appian.]


      86 (return) [ Plutarch, in Pompeio, p. 642.]


      861 (return) [ Wenck contests the accuracy of Gibbon’s version of
      Plutarch, and supposes that Pompey only raised the revenue from
      50,000,000 to 85,000,000 of drachms; but the text of Plutarch
      seems clearly to mean that his conquests added 85,000,000 to the
      ordinary revenue. Wenck adds, “Plutarch says in another part,
      that Antony made Asia pay, at one time, 200,000 talents, that is
      to say, 38,875,000 L. sterling.” But Appian explains this by
      saying that it was the revenue of ten years, which brings the
      annual revenue, at the time of Antony, to 3,875,000 L.
      sterling.—M.]


      87 (return) [ Strabo, l. xvii. p. 798.]


      88 (return) [ Velleius Paterculus, l. ii. c. 39. He seems to give
      the preference to the revenue of Gaul.]


      89 (return) [ The Euboic, the Phœnician, and the Alexandrian
      talents were double in weight to the Attic. See Hooper on ancient
      weights and measures, p. iv. c. 5. It is very probable that the
      same talent was carried from Tyre to Carthage.]


      90 (return) [ Polyb. l. xv. c. 2.]


      91 (return) [ Appian in Punicis, p. 84.]


      Spain, by a very singular fatality, was the Peru and Mexico of
      the old world. The discovery of the rich western continent by the
      Phœnicians, and the oppression of the simple natives, who were
      compelled to labor in their own mines for the benefit of
      strangers, form an exact type of the more recent history of
      Spanish America. 92 The Phœnicians were acquainted only with the
      sea-coast of Spain; avarice, as well as ambition, carried the
      arms of Rome and Carthage into the heart of the country, and
      almost every part of the soil was found pregnant with copper,
      silver, and gold. 921 Mention is made of a mine near Carthagena
      which yielded every day twenty-five thousand drachmns of silver,
      or about three hundred thousand pounds a year. 93 Twenty thousand
      pound weight of gold was annually received from the provinces of
      Asturia, Gallicia, and Lusitania. 94


      92 (return) [ Diodorus Siculus, l. 5. Oadiz was built by the
      Phœnicians a little more than a thousand years before Christ. See
      Vell. Pa ter. i.2.]


      921 (return) [ Compare Heeren’s Researches vol. i. part ii. p.]


      93 (return) [ Strabo, l. iii. p. 148.]


      94 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. l. xxxiii. c. 3. He mentions
      likewise a silver mine in Dalmatia, that yielded every day fifty
      pounds to the state.] We want both leisure and materials to
      pursue this curious inquiry through the many potent states that
      were annihilated in the Roman empire. Some notion, however, may
      be formed of the revenue of the provinces where considerable
      wealth had been deposited by nature, or collected by man, if we
      observe the severe attention that was directed to the abodes of
      solitude and sterility. Augustus once received a petition from
      the inhabitants of Gyarus, humbly praying that they might be
      relieved from one third of their excessive impositions. Their
      whole tax amounted indeed to no more than one hundred and fifty
      drachms, or about five pounds: but Gyarus was a little island, or
      rather a rock, of the Ægean Sea, destitute of fresh water and
      every necessary of life, and inhabited only by a few wretched
      fishermen. 95


      95 (return) [ Strabo, l. x. p. 485. Tacit. Annal. iu. 69, and iv.
      30. See Tournefort (Voyages au Levant, Lettre viii.) a very
      lively picture of the actual misery of Gyarus.]


      From the faint glimmerings of such doubtful and scattered lights,
      we should be inclined to believe, 1st, That (with every fair
      allowance for the differences of times and circumstances) the
      general income of the Roman provinces could seldom amount to less
      than fifteen or twenty millions of our money; 96 and, 2dly, That
      so ample a revenue must have been fully adequate to all the
      expenses of the moderate government instituted by Augustus, whose
      court was the modest family of a private senator, and whose
      military establishment was calculated for the defence of the
      frontiers, without any aspiring views of conquest, or any serious
      apprehension of a foreign invasion.


      96 (return) [ Lipsius de magnitudine Romana (l. ii. c. 3)
      computes the revenue at one hundred and fifty millions of gold
      crowns; but his whole book, though learned and ingenious, betrays
      a very heated imagination. Note: If Justus Lipsius has
      exaggerated the revenue of the Roman empire Gibbon, on the other
      hand, has underrated it. He fixes it at fifteen or twenty
      millions of our money. But if we take only, on a moderate
      calculation, the taxes in the provinces which he has already
      cited, they will amount, considering the augmentations made by
      Augustus, to nearly that sum. There remain also the provinces of
      Italy, of Rhætia, of Noricum, Pannonia, and Greece, &c., &c. Let
      us pay attention, besides, to the prodigious expenditure of some
      emperors, (Suet. Vesp. 16;) we shall see that such a revenue
      could not be sufficient. The authors of the Universal History,
      part xii., assign forty millions sterling as the sum to about
      which the public revenue might amount.—G. from W.]


      Notwithstanding the seeming probability of both these
      conclusions, the latter of them at least is positively disowned
      by the language and conduct of Augustus. It is not easy to
      determine whether, on this occasion, he acted as the common
      father of the Roman world, or as the oppressor of liberty;
      whether he wished to relieve the provinces, or to impoverish the
      senate and the equestrian order. But no sooner had he assumed the
      reins of government, than he frequently intimated the
      insufficiency of the tributes, and the necessity of throwing an
      equitable proportion of the public burden upon Rome and Italy.
      961 In the prosecution of this unpopular design, he advanced,
      however, by cautious and well-weighed steps. The introduction of
      customs was followed by the establishment of an excise, and the
      scheme of taxation was completed by an artful assessment on the
      real and personal property of the Roman citizens, who had been
      exempted from any kind of contribution above a century and a
      half.


      961 (return) [ It is not astonishing that Augustus held this
      language. The senate declared also under Nero, that the state
      could not exist without the imposts as well augmented as founded
      by Augustus. Tac. Ann. xiii. 50. After the abolition of the
      different tributes paid by Italy, an abolition which took place
      A. U. 646, 694, and 695, the state derived no revenues from that
      great country, but the twentieth part of the manumissions,
      (vicesima manumissionum,) and Ciero laments this in many places,
      particularly in his epistles to ii. 15.—G. from W.]


      I. In a great empire like that of Rome, a natural balance of
      money must have gradually established itself. It has been already
      observed, that as the wealth of the provinces was attracted to
      the capital by the strong hand of conquest and power, so a
      considerable part of it was restored to the industrious provinces
      by the gentle influence of commerce and arts. In the reign of
      Augustus and his successors, duties were imposed on every kind of
      merchandise, which through a thousand channels flowed to the
      great centre of opulence and luxury; and in whatsoever manner the
      law was expressed, it was the Roman purchaser, and not the
      provincial merchant, who paid the tax. 97 The rate of the customs
      varied from the eighth to the fortieth part of the value of the
      commodity; and we have a right to suppose that the variation was
      directed by the unalterable maxims of policy; that a higher duty
      was fixed on the articles of luxury than on those of necessity,
      and that the productions raised or manufactured by the labor of
      the subjects of the empire were treated with more indulgence than
      was shown to the pernicious, or at least the unpopular, commerce
      of Arabia and India. 98 There is still extant a long but
      imperfect catalogue of eastern commodities, which about the time
      of Alexander Severus were subject to the payment of duties;
      cinnamon, myrrh, pepper, ginger, and the whole tribe of
      aromatics; a great variety of precious stones, among which the
      diamond was the most remarkable for its price, and the emerald
      for its beauty; 99 Parthian and Babylonian leather, cottons,
      silks, both raw and manufactured, ebony ivory, and eunuchs. 100
      We may observe that the use and value of those effeminate slaves
      gradually rose with the decline of the empire.


      97 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xiii. 31. * Note: The customs
      (portoria) existed in the times of the ancient kings of Rome.
      They were suppressed in Italy, A. U. 694, by the Prætor, Cecilius
      Matellus Nepos. Augustus only reestablished them. See note
      above.—W.]



      98 (return) [See Pliny, (Hist. Natur. l. vi. c. 23, lxii. c. 18.)
      His observation that the Indian commodities were sold at Rome at
      a hundred times their original price, may give us some notion of
      the produce of the customs, since that original price amounted to
      more than eight hundred thousand pounds.]


      99 (return) [ The ancients were unacquainted with the art of
      cutting diamonds.]


      100 (return) [ M. Bouchaud, in his treatise de l’Impot chez les
      Romains, has transcribed this catalogue from the Digest, and
      attempts to illustrate it by a very prolix commentary. * Note: In
      the Pandects, l. 39, t. 14, de Publican. Compare Cicero in
      Verrem. c. 72—74.—W.]


      II. The excise, introduced by Augustus after the civil wars, was
      extremely moderate, but it was general. It seldom exceeded one
      _per cent_.; but it comprehended whatever was sold in the markets
      or by public auction, from the most considerable purchases of
      lands and houses, to those minute objects which can only derive a
      value from their infinite multitude and daily consumption. Such a
      tax, as it affects the body of the people, has ever been the
      occasion of clamor and discontent. An emperor well acquainted
      with the wants and resources of the state was obliged to declare,
      by a public edict, that the support of the army depended in a
      great measure on the produce of the excise. 101


      101 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. i. 78. Two years afterwards, the
      reduction of the poor kingdom of Cappadocia gave Tiberius a
      pretence for diminishing the excise of one half, but the relief
      was of very short duration.]


      III. When Augustus resolved to establish a permanent military
      force for the defence of his government against foreign and
      domestic enemies, he instituted a peculiar treasury for the pay
      of the soldiers, the rewards of the veterans, and the
      extra-ordinary expenses of war. The ample revenue of the excise,
      though peculiarly appropriated to those uses, was found
      inadequate. To supply the deficiency, the emperor suggested a new
      tax of five per cent. on all legacies and inheritances. But the
      nobles of Rome were more tenacious of property than of freedom.
      Their indignant murmurs were received by Augustus with his usual
      temper. He candidly referred the whole business to the senate,
      and exhorted them to provide for the public service by some other
      expedient of a less odious nature. They were divided and
      perplexed. He insinuated to them, that their obstinacy would
      oblige him to _propose_ a general land tax and capitation. They
      acquiesced in silence. 102 The new imposition on legacies and
      inheritances was, however, mitigated by some restrictions. It did
      not take place unless the object was of a certain value, most
      probably of fifty or a hundred pieces of gold; 103 nor could it
      be exacted from the nearest of kin on the father’s side. 104 When
      the rights of nature and poverty were thus secured, it seemed
      reasonable, that a stranger, or a distant relation, who acquired
      an unexpected accession of fortune, should cheerfully resign a
      twentieth part of it, for the benefit of the state. 105


      102 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lv. p. 794, l. lvi. p. 825. Note:
      Dion neither mentions this proposition nor the capitation. He
      only says that the emperor imposed a tax upon landed property,
      and sent every where men employed to make a survey, without
      fixing how much, and for how much each was to pay. The senators
      then preferred giving the tax on legacies and inheritances.—W.]


      103 (return) [ The sum is only fixed by conjecture.]


      104 (return) [ As the Roman law subsisted for many ages, the
      Cognati, or relations on the mother’s side, were not called to
      the succession. This harsh institution was gradually undermined
      by humanity, and finally abolished by Justinian.]


      105 (return) [ Plin. Panegyric. c. 37.]


      Such a tax, plentiful as it must prove in every wealthy
      community, was most happily suited to the situation of the
      Romans, who could frame their arbitrary wills, according to the
      dictates of reason or caprice, without any restraint from the
      modern fetters of entails and settlements. From various causes,
      the partiality of paternal affection often lost its influence
      over the stern patriots of the commonwealth, and the dissolute
      nobles of the empire; and if the father bequeathed to his son the
      fourth part of his estate, he removed all ground of legal
      complaint. 106 But a rich childish old man was a domestic tyrant,
      and his power increased with his years and infirmities. A servile
      crowd, in which he frequently reckoned prætors and consuls,
      courted his smiles, pampered his avarice, applauded his follies,
      served his passions, and waited with impatience for his death.
      The arts of attendance and flattery were formed into a most
      lucrative science; those who professed it acquired a peculiar
      appellation; and the whole city, according to the lively
      descriptions of satire, was divided between two parties, the
      hunters and their game. 107 Yet, while so many unjust and
      extravagant wills were every day dictated by cunning and
      subscribed by folly, a few were the result of rational esteem and
      virtuous gratitude. Cicero, who had so often defended the lives
      and fortunes of his fellow-citizens, was rewarded with legacies
      to the amount of a hundred and seventy thousand pounds; 108 nor
      do the friends of the younger Pliny seem to have been less
      generous to that amiable orator. 109 Whatever was the motive of
      the testator, the treasury claimed, without distinction, the
      twentieth part of his estate: and in the course of two or three
      generations, the whole property of the subject must have
      gradually passed through the coffers of the state.


      106 (return) [ See Heineccius in the Antiquit. Juris Romani, l.
      ii.]


      107 (return) [ Horat. l. ii. Sat. v. Potron. c. 116, &c. Plin. l.
      ii. Epist. 20.]


      108 (return) [ Cicero in Philip. ii. c. 16.]


      109 (return) [ See his epistles. Every such will gave him an
      occasion of displaying his reverence to the dead, and his justice
      to the living. He reconciled both in his behavior to a son who
      had been disinherited by his mother, (v.l.)]


      In the first and golden years of the reign of Nero, that prince,
      from a desire of popularity, and perhaps from a blind impulse of
      benevolence, conceived a wish of abolishing the oppression of the
      customs and excise. The wisest senators applauded his
      magnanimity: but they diverted him from the execution of a design
      which would have dissolved the strength and resources of the
      republic. 110 Had it indeed been possible to realize this dream
      of fancy, such princes as Trajan and the Antonines would surely
      have embraced with ardor the glorious opportunity of conferring
      so signal an obligation on mankind. Satisfied, however, with
      alleviating the public burden, they attempted not to remove it.
      The mildness and precision of their laws ascertained the rule and
      measure of taxation, and protected the subject of every rank
      against arbitrary interpretations, antiquated claims, and the
      insolent vexation of the farmers of the revenue. 111 For it is
      somewhat singular, that, in every age, the best and wisest of the
      Roman governors persevered in this pernicious method of
      collecting the principal branches at least of the excise and
      customs. 112


      110 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xiii. 50. Esprit des Loix, l. xii.
      c. 19.]


      111 (return) [ See Pliny’s Panegyric, the Augustan History, and
      Burman de Vectigal. passim.]


      112 (return) [ The tributes (properly so called) were not farmed;
      since the good princes often remitted many millions of arrears.]


      The sentiments, and, indeed, the situation, of Caracalla were
      very different from those of the Antonines. Inattentive, or
      rather averse, to the welfare of his people, he found himself
      under the necessity of gratifying the insatiate avarice which he
      had excited in the army. Of the several impositions introduced by
      Augustus, the twentieth on inheritances and legacies was the most
      fruitful, as well as the most comprehensive. As its influence was
      not confined to Rome or Italy, the produce continually increased
      with the gradual extension of the Roman City. The new citizens,
      though charged, on equal terms, 113 with the payment of new
      taxes, which had not affected them as subjects, derived an ample
      compensation from the rank they obtained, the privileges they
      acquired, and the fair prospect of honors and fortune that was
      thrown open to their ambition. But the favor which implied a
      distinction was lost in the prodigality of Caracalla, and the
      reluctant provincials were compelled to assume the vain title,
      and the real obligations, of Roman citizens. 1131 Nor was the
      rapacious son of Severus contented with such a measure of
      taxation as had appeared sufficient to his moderate predecessors.
      Instead of a twentieth, he exacted a tenth of all legacies and
      inheritances; and during his reign (for the ancient proportion
      was restored after his death) he crushed alike every part of the
      empire under the weight of his iron sceptre. 114


      113 (return) [ The situation of the new citizens is minutely
      described by Pliny, (Panegyric, c. 37, 38, 39). Trajan published
      a law very much in their favor.]


      1131 (return) [ Gibbon has adopted the opinion of Spanheim and of
      Burman, which attributes to Caracalla this edict, which gave the
      right of the city to all the inhabitants of the provinces. This
      opinion may be disputed. Several passages of Spartianus, of
      Aurelius Victor, and of Aristides, attribute this edict to Marc.
      Aurelius. See a learned essay, entitled Joh. P. Mahneri Comm. de
      Marc. Aur. Antonino Constitutionis de Civitate Universo Orbi
      Romano data auctore. Halæ, 1772, 8vo. It appears that Marc.
      Aurelius made some modifications of this edict, which released
      the provincials from some of the charges imposed by the right of
      the city, and deprived them of some of the advantages which it
      conferred. Caracalla annulled these modifications.—W.]


      114 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1295.]


      When all the provincials became liable to the peculiar
      impositions of Roman citizens, they seemed to acquire a legal
      exemption from the tributes which they had paid in their former
      condition of subjects. Such were not the maxims of government
      adopted by Caracalla and his pretended son. The old as well as
      the new taxes were, at the same time, levied in the provinces. It
      was reserved for the virtue of Alexander to relieve them in a
      great measure from this intolerable grievance, by reducing the
      tributes to a thirteenth part of the sum exacted at the time of
      his accession. 115 It is impossible to conjecture the motive that
      engaged him to spare so trifling a remnant of the public evil;
      but the noxious weed, which had not been totally eradicated,
      again sprang up with the most luxuriant growth, and in the
      succeeding age darkened the Roman world with its deadly shade. In
      the course of this history, we shall be too often summoned to
      explain the land tax, the capitation, and the heavy contributions
      of corn, wine, oil, and meat, which were exacted from the
      provinces for the use of the court, the army, and the capital.


      115 (return) [ He who paid ten aurei, the usual tribute, was
      charged with no more than the third part of an aureus, and
      proportional pieces of gold were coined by Alexander’s order.
      Hist. August. p. 127, with the commentary of Salmasius.]


      As long as Rome and Italy were respected as the centre of
      government, a national spirit was preserved by the ancient, and
      insensibly imbibed by the adopted, citizens. The principal
      commands of the army were filled by men who had received a
      liberal education, were well instructed in the advantages of laws
      and letters, and who had risen, by equal steps, through the
      regular succession of civil and military honors. 116 To their
      influence and example we may partly ascribe the modest obedience
      of the legions during the two first centuries of the Imperial
      history.


      116 (return) [ See the lives of Agricola, Vespasian, Trajan,
      Severus, and his three competitors; and indeed of all the eminent
      men of those times.]


      But when the last enclosure of the Roman constitution was
      trampled down by Caracalla, the separation of professions
      gradually succeeded to the distinction of ranks. The more
      polished citizens of the internal provinces were alone qualified
      to act as lawyers and magistrates. The rougher trade of arms was
      abandoned to the peasants and barbarians of the frontiers, who
      knew no country but their camp, no science but that of war, no
      civil laws, and scarcely those of military discipline. With
      bloody hands, savage manners, and desperate resolutions, they
      sometimes guarded, but much oftener subverted, the throne of the
      emperors.
