Chapter XIV: Six Emperors At The Same Time, Reunion Of The
      Empire.—Part I.


Troubles After The Abdication Of Diocletian.—Death Of
Constantius.—Elevation Of Constantine And Maxen Tius.—Six Emperors At
The Same Time.—Death Of Maximian And Galerius.—Victories Of Constantine
Over Maxentius And Licinus.—Reunion Of The Empire Under The Authority
Of Constantine.


      The balance of power established by Diocletian subsisted no
      longer than while it was sustained by the firm and dexterous hand
      of the founder. It required such a fortunate mixture of different
      tempers and abilities as could scarcely be found or even expected
      a second time; two emperors without jealousy, two Cæsars without
      ambition, and the same general interest invariably pursued by
      four independent princes. The abdication of Diocletian and
      Maximian was succeeded by eighteen years of discord and
      confusion. The empire was afflicted by five civil wars; and the
      remainder of the time was not so much a state of tranquillity as
      a suspension of arms between several hostile monarchs, who,
      viewing each other with an eye of fear and hatred, strove to
      increase their respective forces at the expense of their
      subjects.


      As soon as Diocletian and Maximian had resigned the purple, their
      station, according to the rules of the new constitution, was
      filled by the two Cæsars, Constantius and Galerius, who
      immediately assumed the title of Augustus. 1


      1 (return) [ M. de Montesquieu (Considerations sur la Grandeur et
      La Decadence des Romains, c. 17) supposes, on the authority of
      Orosius and Eusebius, that, on this occasion, the empire, for the
      first time, was really divided into two parts. It is difficult,
      however, to discover in what respect the plan of Galerius
      differed from that of Diocletian.]


      The honors of seniority and precedence were allowed to the former
      of those princes, and he continued under a new appellation to
      administer his ancient department of Gaul, Spain, and Britain.


      The government of those ample provinces was sufficient to
      exercise his talents and to satisfy his ambition. Clemency,
      temperance, and moderation, distinguished the amiable character
      of Constantius, and his fortunate subjects had frequently
      occasion to compare the virtues of their sovereign with the
      passions of Maximian, and even with the arts of Diocletian. 2
      Instead of imitating their eastern pride and magnificence,
      Constantius preserved the modesty of a Roman prince. He declared,
      with unaffected sincerity, that his most valued treasure was in
      the hearts of his people, and that, whenever the dignity of the
      throne, or the danger of the state, required any extraordinary
      supply, he could depend with confidence on their gratitude and
      liberality. 3 The provincials of Gaul, Spain, and Britain,
      sensible of his worth, and of their own happiness, reflected with
      anxiety on the declining health of the emperor Constantius, and
      the tender age of his numerous family, the issue of his second
      marriage with the daughter of Maximian.


      2 (return) [ Hic non modo amabilis, sed etiam venerabilis Gallis
      fuit; præcipuc quod Diocletiani suspectam prudentiam, et
      Maximiani sanguinariam violentiam imperio ejus evaserant. Eutrop.
      Breviar. x. i.]


      3 (return) [ Divitiis Provincialium (mel. provinciarum) ac
      privatorum studens, fisci commoda non admodum affectans;
      ducensque melius publicas opes a privatis haberi, quam intra unum
      claustrum reservari. Id. ibid. He carried this maxim so far, that
      whenever he gave an entertainment, he was obliged to borrow a
      service of plate.]


      The stern temper of Galerius was cast in a very different mould;
      and while he commanded the esteem of his subjects, he seldom
      condescended to solicit their affections. His fame in arms, and,
      above all, the success of the Persian war, had elated his haughty
      mind, which was naturally impatient of a superior, or even of an
      equal. If it were possible to rely on the partial testimony of an
      injudicious writer, we might ascribe the abdication of Diocletian
      to the menaces of Galerius, and relate the particulars of a
      _private_ conversation between the two princes, in which the
      former discovered as much pusillanimity as the latter displayed
      ingratitude and arrogance. 4 But these obscure anecdotes are
      sufficiently refuted by an impartial view of the character and
      conduct of Diocletian. Whatever might otherwise have been his
      intentions, if he had apprehended any danger from the violence of
      Galerius, his good sense would have instructed him to prevent the
      ignominious contest; and as he had held the sceptre with glory,
      he would have resigned it without disgrace.


      4 (return) [ Lactantius de Mort. Persecutor. c. 18. Were the
      particulars of this conference more consistent with truth and
      decency, we might still ask how they came to the knowledge of an
      obscure rhetorician. But there are many historians who put us in
      mind of the admirable saying of the great Conde to Cardinal de
      Retz: “Ces coquins nous font parlor et agir, comme ils auroient
      fait eux-memes a notre place.” * Note: This attack upon
      Lactantius is unfounded. Lactantius was so far from having been
      an obscure rhetorician, that he had taught rhetoric publicly, and
      with the greatest success, first in Africa, and afterwards in
      Nicomedia. His reputation obtained him the esteem of Constantine,
      who invited him to his court, and intrusted to him the education
      of his son Crispus. The facts which he relates took place during
      his own time; he cannot be accused of dishonesty or imposture.
      Satis me vixisse arbitrabor et officium hominis implesse si labor
      meus aliquos homines, ab erroribus iberatos, ad iter coeleste
      direxerit. De Opif. Dei, cap. 20. The eloquence of Lactantius has
      caused him to be called the Christian Cicero. Annon Gent.—G.
      ——Yet no unprejudiced person can read this coarse and particular
      private conversation of the two emperors, without assenting to
      the justice of Gibbon’s severe sentence. But the authorship of
      the treatise is by no means certain. The fame of Lactantius for
      eloquence as well as for truth, would suffer no loss if it should
      be adjudged to some more “obscure rhetorician.” Manso, in his
      Leben Constantins des Grossen, concurs on this point with Gibbon
      Beylage, iv. —M.]


      After the elevation of Constantius and Galerius to the rank of
      _Augusti_, two new _Cæsars_ were required to supply their place,
      and to complete the system of the Imperial government. Diocletian
      was sincerely desirous of withdrawing himself from the world; he
      considered Galerius, who had married his daughter, as the firmest
      support of his family and of the empire; and he consented,
      without reluctance, that his successor should assume the merit as
      well as the envy of the important nomination. It was fixed
      without consulting the interest or inclination of the princes of
      the West. Each of them had a son who was arrived at the age of
      manhood, and who might have been deemed the most natural
      candidates for the vacant honor. But the impotent resentment of
      Maximian was no longer to be dreaded; and the moderate
      Constantius, though he might despise the dangers, was humanely
      apprehensive of the calamities, of civil war. The two persons
      whom Galerius promoted to the rank of Cæsar were much better
      suited to serve the views of his ambition; and their principal
      recommendation seems to have consisted in the want of merit or
      personal consequence. The first of these was Daza, or, as he was
      afterwards called, Maximin, whose mother was the sister of
      Galerius. The unexperienced youth still betrayed, by his manners
      and language, his rustic education, when, to his own
      astonishment, as well as that of the world, he was invested by
      Diocletian with the purple, exalted to the dignity of Cæsar, and
      intrusted with the sovereign command of Egypt and Syria. 5 At the
      same time, Severus, a faithful servant, addicted to pleasure, but
      not incapable of business, was sent to Milan, to receive, from
      the reluctant hands of Maximian, the Cæsarian ornaments, and the
      possession of Italy and Africa. According to the forms of the
      constitution, Severus acknowledged the supremacy of the western
      emperor; but he was absolutely devoted to the commands of his
      benefactor Galerius, who, reserving to himself the intermediate
      countries from the confines of Italy to those of Syria, firmly
      established his power over three fourths of the monarchy. In the
      full confidence that the approaching death of Constantius would
      leave him sole master of the Roman world, we are assured that he
      had arranged in his mind a long succession of future princes, and
      that he meditated his own retreat from public life, after he
      should have accomplished a glorious reign of about twenty years.
      6 7


      5 (return) [ Sublatus nuper a pecoribus et silvis (says
      Lactantius de M. P. c. 19) statim Scutarius, continuo Protector,
      mox Tribunus, postridie Cæsar, accepit Orientem. Aurelius Victor
      is too liberal in giving him the whole portion of Diocletian.]


      6 (return) [ His diligence and fidelity are acknowledged even by
      Lactantius, de M. P. c. 18.]


      7 (return) [ These schemes, however, rest only on the very
      doubtful authority of Lactantius de M. P. c. 20.]


      But within less than eighteen months, two unexpected revolutions
      overturned the ambitious schemes of Galerius. The hopes of
      uniting the western provinces to his empire were disappointed by
      the elevation of Constantine, whilst Italy and Africa were lost
      by the successful revolt of Maxentius.


      I. The fame of Constantine has rendered posterity attentive to
      the most minute circumstances of his life and actions. The place
      of his birth, as well as the condition of his mother Helena, have
      been the subject, not only of literary, but of national disputes.
      Notwithstanding the recent tradition, which assigns for her
      father a British king, 8 we are obliged to confess, that Helena
      was the daughter of an innkeeper; but at the same time, we may
      defend the legality of her marriage, against those who have
      represented her as the concubine of Constantius. 9 The great
      Constantine was most probably born at Naissus, in Dacia; 10 and
      it is not surprising that, in a family and province distinguished
      only by the profession of arms, the youth should discover very
      little inclination to improve his mind by the acquisition of
      knowledge. 11 He was about eighteen years of age when his father
      was promoted to the rank of Cæsar; but that fortunate event was
      attended with his mother’s divorce; and the splendor of an
      Imperial alliance reduced the son of Helena to a state of
      disgrace and humiliation. Instead of following Constantius in the
      West, he remained in the service of Diocletian, signalized his
      valor in the wars of Egypt and Persia, and gradually rose to the
      honorable station of a tribune of the first order. The figure of
      Constantine was tall and majestic; he was dexterous in all his
      exercises, intrepid in war, affable in peace; in his whole
      conduct, the active spirit of youth was tempered by habitual
      prudence; and while his mind was engrossed by ambition, he
      appeared cold and insensible to the allurements of pleasure. The
      favor of the people and soldiers, who had named him as a worthy
      candidate for the rank of Cæsar, served only to exasperate the
      jealousy of Galerius; and though prudence might restrain him from
      exercising any open violence, an absolute monarch is seldom at a
      loss how to execute a sure and secret revenge. 12 Every hour
      increased the danger of Constantine, and the anxiety of his
      father, who, by repeated letters, expressed the warmest desire of
      embracing his son. For some time the policy of Galerius supplied
      him with delays and excuses; but it was impossible long to refuse
      so natural a request of his associate, without maintaining his
      refusal by arms. The permission of the journey was reluctantly
      granted, and whatever precautions the emperor might have taken to
      intercept a return, the consequences of which he, with so much
      reason, apprehended, they were effectually disappointed by the
      incredible diligence of Constantine. 13 Leaving the palace of
      Nicomedia in the night, he travelled post through Bithynia,
      Thrace, Dacia, Pannonia, Italy, and Gaul, and, amidst the joyful
      acclamations of the people, reached the port of Boulogne in the
      very moment when his father was preparing to embark for Britain.
      14


      8 (return) [ This tradition, unknown to the contemporaries of
      Constantine was invented in the darkness of monestaries, was
      embellished by Jeffrey of Monmouth, and the writers of the xiith
      century, has been defended by our antiquarians of the last age,
      and is seriously related in the ponderous History of England,
      compiled by Mr. Carte, (vol. i. p. 147.) He transports, however,
      the kingdom of Coil, the imaginary father of Helena, from Essex
      to the wall of Antoninus.]


      9 (return) [ Eutropius (x. 2) expresses, in a few words, the real
      truth, and the occasion of the error “ex obscuriori matrimonio
      ejus filius.” Zosimus (l. ii. p. 78) eagerly seized the most
      unfavorable report, and is followed by Orosius, (vii. 25,) whose
      authority is oddly enough overlooked by the indefatigable, but
      partial Tillemont. By insisting on the divorce of Helena,
      Diocletian acknowledged her marriage.]


      10 (return) [ There are three opinions with regard to the place
      of Constantine’s birth. 1. Our English antiquarians were used to
      dwell with rapture on the words of his panegyrist, “Britannias
      illic oriendo nobiles fecisti.” But this celebrated passage may
      be referred with as much propriety to the accession, as to the
      nativity of Constantine. 2. Some of the modern Greeks have
      ascribed the honor of his birth to Drepanum, a town on the Gulf
      of Nicomedia, (Cellarius, tom. ii. p. 174,) which Constantine
      dignified with the name of Helenopolis, and Justinian adorned
      with many splendid buildings, (Procop. de Edificiis, v. 2.) It is
      indeed probable enough, that Helena’s father kept an inn at
      Drepanum, and that Constantius might lodge there when he returned
      from a Persian embassy, in the reign of Aurelian. But in the
      wandering life of a soldier, the place of his marriage, and the
      places where his children are born, have very little connection
      with each other. 3. The claim of Naissus is supported by the
      anonymous writer, published at the end of Ammianus, p. 710, and
      who in general copied very good materials; and it is confirmed by
      Julius Firmicus, (de Astrologia, l. i. c. 4,) who flourished
      under the reign of Constantine himself. Some objections have been
      raised against the integrity of the text, and the application of
      the passage of Firmicus but the former is established by the best
      Mss., and the latter is very ably defended by Lipsius de
      Magnitudine Romana, l. iv. c. 11, et Supplement.]


      11 (return) [ Literis minus instructus. Anonym. ad Ammian. p.
      710.]


      12 (return) [ Galerius, or perhaps his own courage, exposed him
      to single combat with a Sarmatian, (Anonym. p. 710,) and with a
      monstrous lion. See Praxagoras apud Photium, p. 63. Praxagoras,
      an Athenian philosopher, had written a life of Constantine in two
      books, which are now lost. He was a contemporary.]


      13 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 78, 79. Lactantius de M. P. c.
      24. The former tells a very foolish story, that Constantine
      caused all the post-horses which he had used to be hamstrung.
      Such a bloody execution, without preventing a pursuit, would have
      scattered suspicions, and might have stopped his journey. * Note:
      Zosimus is not the only writer who tells this story. The younger
      Victor confirms it. Ad frustrandos insequentes, publica jumenta,
      quaqua iter ageret, interficiens. Aurelius Victor de Cæsar says
      the same thing, G. as also the Anonymus Valesii.— M. ——Manso,
      (Leben Constantins,) p. 18, observes that the story has been
      exaggerated; he took this precaution during the first stage of
      his journey.—M.]


      14 (return) [ Anonym. p. 710. Panegyr. Veter. vii. 4. But
      Zosimus, l. ii. p. 79, Eusebius de Vit. Constant. l. i. c. 21,
      and Lactantius de M. P. c. 24. suppose, with less accuracy, that
      he found his father on his death-bed.]


      The British expedition, and an easy victory over the barbarians
      of Caledonia, were the last exploits of the reign of Constantius.
      He ended his life in the Imperial palace of York, fifteen months
      after he had received the title of Augustus, and almost fourteen
      years and a half after he had been promoted to the rank of Cæsar.
      His death was immediately succeeded by the elevation of
      Constantine. The ideas of inheritance and succession are so very
      familiar, that the generality of mankind consider them as founded
      not only in reason but in nature itself. Our imagination readily
      transfers the same principles from private property to public
      dominion: and whenever a virtuous father leaves behind him a son
      whose merit seems to justify the esteem, or even the hopes, of
      the people, the joint influence of prejudice and of affection
      operates with irresistible weight. The flower of the western
      armies had followed Constantius into Britain, and the national
      troops were reënforced by a numerous body of Alemanni, who obeyed
      the orders of Crocus, one of their hereditary chieftains. 15 The
      opinion of their own importance, and the assurance that Britain,
      Gaul, and Spain would acquiesce in their nomination, were
      diligently inculcated to the legions by the adherents of
      Constantine. The soldiers were asked, whether they could hesitate
      a moment between the honor of placing at their head the worthy
      son of their beloved emperor, and the ignominy of tamely
      expecting the arrival of some obscure stranger, on whom it might
      please the sovereign of Asia to bestow the armies and provinces
      of the West. It was insinuated to them, that gratitude and
      liberality held a distinguished place among the virtues of
      Constantine; nor did that artful prince show himself to the
      troops, till they were prepared to salute him with the names of
      Augustus and Emperor. The throne was the object of his desires;
      and had he been less actuated by ambition, it was his only means
      of safety. He was well acquainted with the character and
      sentiments of Galerius, and sufficiently apprised, that if he
      wished to live he must determine to reign. The decent and even
      obstinate resistance which he chose to affect, 16 was contrived
      to justify his usurpation; nor did he yield to the acclamations
      of the army, till he had provided the proper materials for a
      letter, which he immediately despatched to the emperor of the
      East. Constantine informed him of the melancholy event of his
      father’s death, modestly asserted his natural claim to the
      succession, and respectfully lamented, that the affectionate
      violence of his troops had not permitted him to solicit the
      Imperial purple in the regular and constitutional manner. The
      first emotions of Galerius were those of surprise,
      disappointment, and rage; and as he could seldom restrain his
      passions, he loudly threatened, that he would commit to the
      flames both the letter and the messenger. But his resentment
      insensibly subsided; and when he recollected the doubtful chance
      of war, when he had weighed the character and strength of his
      adversary, he consented to embrace the honorable accommodation
      which the prudence of Constantine had left open to him. Without
      either condemning or ratifying the choice of the British army,
      Galerius accepted the son of his deceased colleague as the
      sovereign of the provinces beyond the Alps; but he gave him only
      the title of Cæsar, and the fourth rank among the Roman princes,
      whilst he conferred the vacant place of Augustus on his favorite
      Severus. The apparent harmony of the empire was still preserved,
      and Constantine, who already possessed the substance, expected,
      without impatience, an opportunity of obtaining the honors, of
      supreme power. 17


      15 (return) [ Cunctis qui aderant, annitentibus, sed præcipue
      Croco (alii Eroco) [Erich?] Alamannorum Rege, auxilii gratia
      Constantium comitato, imperium capit. Victor Junior, c. 41. This
      is perhaps the first instance of a barbarian king, who assisted
      the Roman arms with an independent body of his own subjects. The
      practice grew familiar and at last became fatal.]


      16 (return) [ His panegyrist Eumenius (vii. 8) ventures to affirm
      in the presence of Constantine, that he put spurs to his horse,
      and tried, but in vain, to escape from the hands of his
      soldiers.]


      17 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 25. Eumenius (vii. 8.) gives
      a rhetorical turn to the whole transaction.]


      The children of Constantius by his second marriage were six in
      number, three of either sex, and whose Imperial descent might
      have solicited a preference over the meaner extraction of the son
      of Helena. But Constantine was in the thirty-second year of his
      age, in the full vigor both of mind and body, at the time when
      the eldest of his brothers could not possibly be more than
      thirteen years old. His claim of superior merit had been allowed
      and ratified by the dying emperor. 18 In his last moments
      Constantius bequeathed to his eldest son the care of the safety
      as well as greatness of the family; conjuring him to assume both
      the authority and the sentiments of a father with regard to the
      children of Theodora. Their liberal education, advantageous
      marriages, the secure dignity of their lives, and the first
      honors of the state with which they were invested, attest the
      fraternal affection of Constantine; and as those princes
      possessed a mild and grateful disposition, they submitted without
      reluctance to the superiority of his genius and fortune. 19


      18 (return) [ The choice of Constantine, by his dying father,
      which is warranted by reason, and insinuated by Eumenius, seems
      to be confirmed by the most unexceptionable authority, the
      concurring evidence of Lactantius (de M. P. c. 24) and of
      Libanius, (Oratio i.,) of Eusebius (in Vit. Constantin. l. i. c.
      18, 21) and of Julian, (Oratio i)]


      19 (return) [ Of the three sisters of Constantine, Constantia
      married the emperor Licinius, Anastasia the Cæsar Bassianus, and
      Eutropia the consul Nepotianus. The three brothers were,
      Dalmatius, Julius Constantius, and Annibalianus, of whom we shall
      have occasion to speak hereafter.]


      II. The ambitious spirit of Galerius was scarcely reconciled to
      the disappointment of his views upon the Gallic provinces, before
      the unexpected loss of Italy wounded his pride as well as power
      in a still more sensible part. The long absence of the emperors
      had filled Rome with discontent and indignation; and the people
      gradually discovered, that the preference given to Nicomedia and
      Milan was not to be ascribed to the particular inclination of
      Diocletian, but to the permanent form of government which he had
      instituted. It was in vain that, a few months after his
      abdication, his successors dedicated, under his name, those
      magnificent baths, whose ruins still supply the ground as well as
      the materials for so many churches and convents. 20 The
      tranquility of those elegant recesses of ease and luxury was
      disturbed by the impatient murmurs of the Romans, and a report
      was insensibly circulated, that the sums expended in erecting
      those buildings would soon be required at their hands. About that
      time the avarice of Galerius, or perhaps the exigencies of the
      state, had induced him to make a very strict and rigorous
      inquisition into the property of his subjects, for the purpose of
      a general taxation, both on their lands and on their persons. A
      very minute survey appears to have been taken of their real
      estates; and wherever there was the slightest suspicion of
      concealment, torture was very freely employed to obtain a sincere
      declaration of their personal wealth. 21 The privileges which had
      exalted Italy above the rank of the provinces were no longer
      regarded: 211 and the officers of the revenue already began to
      number the Roman people, and to settle the proportion of the new
      taxes. Even when the spirit of freedom had been utterly
      extinguished, the tamest subjects have sometimes ventured to
      resist an unprecedented invasion of their property; but on this
      occasion the injury was aggravated by the insult, and the sense
      of private interest was quickened by that of national honor. The
      conquest of Macedonia, as we have already observed, had delivered
      the Roman people from the weight of personal taxes.


      Though they had experienced every form of despotism, they had now
      enjoyed that exemption near five hundred years; nor could they
      patiently brook the insolence of an Illyrian peasant, who, from
      his distant residence in Asia, presumed to number Rome among the
      tributary cities of his empire. The rising fury of the people was
      encouraged by the authority, or at least the connivance, of the
      senate; and the feeble remains of the Prætorian guards, who had
      reason to apprehend their own dissolution, embraced so honorable
      a pretence, and declared their readiness to draw their swords in
      the service of their oppressed country. It was the wish, and it
      soon became the hope, of every citizen, that after expelling from
      Italy their foreign tyrants, they should elect a prince who, by
      the place of his residence, and by his maxims of government,
      might once more deserve the title of Roman emperor. The name, as
      well as the situation, of Maxentius determined in his favor the
      popular enthusiasm.


      20 (return) [ See Gruter. Inscrip. p. 178. The six princes are
      all mentioned, Diocletian and Maximian as the senior Augusti, and
      fathers of the emperors. They jointly dedicate, for the use of
      their own Romans, this magnificent edifice. The architects have
      delineated the ruins of these Thermoe, and the antiquarians,
      particularly Donatus and Nardini, have ascertained the ground
      which they covered. One of the great rooms is now the Carthusian
      church; and even one of the porter’s lodges is sufficient to form
      another church, which belongs to the Feuillans.]


      21 (return) [ See Lactantius de M. P. c. 26, 31. ]


      211 (return) [ Saviguy, in his memoir on Roman taxation, (Mem.
      Berl. Academ. 1822, 1823, p. 5,) dates from this period the
      abolition of the Jus Italicum. He quotes a remarkable passage of
      Aurelius Victor. Hinc denique parti Italiæ invec tum tributorum
      ingens malum. Aur. Vict. c. 39. It was a necessary consequence of
      the division of the empire: it became impossible to maintain a
      second court and executive, and leave so large and fruitful a
      part of the territory exempt from contribution.—M.]


      Maxentius was the son of the emperor Maximian, and he had married
      the daughter of Galerius. His birth and alliance seemed to offer
      him the fairest promise of succeeding to the empire; but his
      vices and incapacity procured him the same exclusion from the
      dignity of Cæsar, which Constantine had deserved by a dangerous
      superiority of merit. The policy of Galerius preferred such
      associates as would never disgrace the choice, nor dispute the
      commands, of their benefactor. An obscure stranger was therefore
      raised to the throne of Italy, and the son of the late emperor of
      the West was left to enjoy the luxury of a private fortune in a
      villa a few miles distant from the capital. The gloomy passions
      of his soul, shame, vexation, and rage, were inflamed by envy on
      the news of Constantine’s success; but the hopes of Maxentius
      revived with the public discontent, and he was easily persuaded
      to unite his personal injury and pretensions with the cause of
      the Roman people. Two Prætorian tribunes and a commissary of
      provisions undertook the management of the conspiracy; and as
      every order of men was actuated by the same spirit, the immediate
      event was neither doubtful nor difficult. The præfect of the
      city, and a few magistrates, who maintained their fidelity to
      Severus, were massacred by the guards; and Maxentius, invested
      with the Imperial ornaments, was acknowledged by the applauding
      senate and people as the protector of the Roman freedom and
      dignity. It is uncertain whether Maximian was previously
      acquainted with the conspiracy; but as soon as the standard of
      rebellion was erected at Rome, the old emperor broke from the
      retirement where the authority of Diocletian had condemned him to
      pass a life of melancholy and solitude, and concealed his
      returning ambition under the disguise of paternal tenderness. At
      the request of his son and of the senate, he condescended to
      reassume the purple. His ancient dignity, his experience, and his
      fame in arms, added strength as well as reputation to the party
      of Maxentius. 22


      22 (return) [ The sixth Panegyric represents the conduct of
      Maximian in the most favorable light, and the ambiguous
      expression of Aurelius Victor, “retractante diu,” may signify
      either that he contrived, or that he opposed, the conspiracy. See
      Zosimus, l. ii. p. 79, and Lactantius de M. P. c. 26.]


      According to the advice, or rather the orders, of his colleague,
      the emperor Severus immediately hastened to Rome, in the full
      confidence, that, by his unexpected celerity, he should easily
      suppress the tumult of an unwarlike populace, commanded by a
      licentious youth. But he found on his arrival the gates of the
      city shut against him, the walls filled with men and arms, an
      experienced general at the head of the rebels, and his own troops
      without spirit or affection. A large body of Moors deserted to
      the enemy, allured by the promise of a large donative; and, if it
      be true that they had been levied by Maximian in his African war,
      preferring the natural feelings of gratitude to the artificial
      ties of allegiance. Anulinus, the Prætorian præfect, declared
      himself in favor of Maxentius, and drew after him the most
      considerable part of the troops, accustomed to obey his commands.


      Rome, according to the expression of an orator, recalled her
      armies; and the unfortunate Severus, destitute of force and of
      counsel, retired, or rather fled, with precipitation, to Ravenna.


      Here he might for some time have been safe. The fortifications of
      Ravenna were able to resist the attempts, and the morasses that
      surrounded the town were sufficient to prevent the approach, of
      the Italian army. The sea, which Severus commanded with a
      powerful fleet, secured him an inexhaustible supply of
      provisions, and gave a free entrance to the legions, which, on
      the return of spring, would advance to his assistance from
      Illyricum and the East. Maximian, who conducted the siege in
      person, was soon convinced that he might waste his time and his
      army in the fruitless enterprise, and that he had nothing to hope
      either from force or famine. With an art more suitable to the
      character of Diocletian than to his own, he directed his attack,
      not so much against the walls of Ravenna, as against the mind of
      Severus. The treachery which he had experienced disposed that
      unhappy prince to distrust the most sincere of his friends and
      adherents. The emissaries of Maximian easily persuaded his
      credulity, that a conspiracy was formed to betray the town, and
      prevailed upon his fears not to expose himself to the discretion
      of an irritated conqueror, but to accept the faith of an
      honorable capitulation. He was at first received with humanity
      and treated with respect. Maximian conducted the captive emperor
      to Rome, and gave him the most solemn assurances that he had
      secured his life by the resignation of the purple. But Severus
      could obtain only an easy death and an Imperial funeral. When the
      sentence was signified to him, the manner of executing it was
      left to his own choice; he preferred the favorite mode of the
      ancients, that of opening his veins; and as soon as he expired,
      his body was carried to the sepulchre which had been constructed
      for the family of Gallienus. 23


      23 (return) [ The circumstances of this war, and the death of
      Severus, are very doubtfully and variously told in our ancient
      fragments, (see Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iv. part i.
      p. 555.) I have endeavored to extract from them a consistent and
      probable narration. * Note: Manso justly observes that two
      totally different narratives might be formed, almost upon equal
      authority. Beylage, iv.—M.]


      Chapter XIV: Six Emperors At The Same Time, Reunion Of The
      Empire.—Part II.


      Though the characters of Constantine and Maxentius had very
      little affinity with each other, their situation and interest
      were the same; and prudence seemed to require that they should
      unite their forces against the common enemy. Notwithstanding the
      superiority of his age and dignity, the indefatigable Maximian
      passed the Alps, and, courting a personal interview with the
      sovereign of Gaul, carried with him his daughter Fausta as the
      pledge of the new alliance. The marriage was celebrated at Arles
      with every circumstance of magnificence; and the ancient
      colleague of Diocletian, who again asserted his claim to the
      Western empire, conferred on his son-in-law and ally the title of
      Augustus. By consenting to receive that honor from Maximian,
      Constantine seemed to embrace the cause of Rome and of the
      senate; but his professions were ambiguous, and his assistance
      slow and ineffectual. He considered with attention the
      approaching contest between the masters of Italy and the emperor
      of the East, and was prepared to consult his own safety or
      ambition in the event of the war. 24


      24 (return) [ The sixth Panegyric was pronounced to celebrate the
      elevation of Constantine; but the prudent orator avoids the
      mention either of Galerius or of Maxentius. He introduces only
      one slight allusion to the actual troubles, and to the majesty of
      Rome. * Note: Compare Manso, Beylage, iv. p. 302. Gibbon’s
      account is at least as probable as that of his critic.—M.]


      The importance of the occasion called for the presence and
      abilities of Galerius. At the head of a powerful army, collected
      from Illyricum and the East, he entered Italy, resolved to
      revenge the death of Severus, and to chastise the rebellious
      Romans; or, as he expressed his intentions, in the furious
      language of a barbarian, to extirpate the senate, and to destroy
      the people by the sword. But the skill of Maximian had concerted
      a prudent system of defence. The invader found every place
      hostile, fortified, and inaccessible; and though he forced his
      way as far as Narni, within sixty miles of Rome, his dominion in
      Italy was confined to the narrow limits of his camp. Sensible of
      the increasing difficulties of his enterprise, the haughty
      Galerius made the first advances towards a reconciliation, and
      despatched two of his most considerable officers to tempt the
      Roman princes by the offer of a conference, and the declaration
      of his paternal regard for Maxentius, who might obtain much more
      from his liberality than he could hope from the doubtful chance
      of war. 25 The offers of Galerius were rejected with firmness,
      his perfidious friendship refused with contempt, and it was not
      long before he discovered, that, unless he provided for his
      safety by a timely retreat, he had some reason to apprehend the
      fate of Severus. The wealth which the Romans defended against his
      rapacious tyranny, they freely contributed for his destruction.
      The name of Maximian, the popular arts of his son, the secret
      distribution of large sums, and the promise of still more liberal
      rewards, checked the ardor and corrupted the fidelity of the
      Illyrian legions; and when Galerius at length gave the signal of
      the retreat, it was with some difficulty that he could prevail on
      his veterans not to desert a banner which had so often conducted
      them to victory and honor. A contemporary writer assigns two
      other causes for the failure of the expedition; but they are both
      of such a nature, that a cautious historian will scarcely venture
      to adopt them. We are told that Galerius, who had formed a very
      imperfect notion of the greatness of Rome by the cities of the
      East with which he was acquainted, found his forces inadequate to
      the siege of that immense capital.


      But the extent of a city serves only to render it more accessible
      to the enemy: Rome had long since been accustomed to submit on
      the approach of a conqueror; nor could the temporary enthusiasm
      of the people have long contended against the discipline and
      valor of the legions. We are likewise informed that the legions
      themselves were struck with horror and remorse, and that those
      pious sons of the republic refused to violate the sanctity of
      their venerable parent. 26 But when we recollect with how much
      ease, in the more ancient civil wars, the zeal of party and the
      habits of military obedience had converted the native citizens of
      Rome into her most implacable enemies, we shall be inclined to
      distrust this extreme delicacy of strangers and barbarians, who
      had never beheld Italy till they entered it in a hostile manner.
      Had they not been restrained by motives of a more interested
      nature, they would probably have answered Galerius in the words
      of Cæsar’s veterans: “If our general wishes to lead us to the
      banks of the Tyber, we are prepared to trace out his camp.
      Whatsoever walls he has determined to level with the ground, our
      hands are ready to work the engines: nor shall we hesitate,
      should the name of the devoted city be Rome itself.” These are
      indeed the expressions of a poet; but of a poet who has been
      distinguished, and even censured, for his strict adherence to the
      truth of history. 27


      25 (return) [ With regard to this negotiation, see the fragments
      of an anonymous historian, published by Valesius at the end of
      his edition of Ammianus Marcellinus, p. 711. These fragments have
      furnished with several curious, and, as it should seem, authentic
      anecdotes.]


      26 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 28. The former of these
      reasons is probably taken from Virgil’s Shepherd: “Illam * * *
      ego huic notra similem, Meliboee, putavi,” &c. Lactantius
      delights in these poetical illusions.]


      27 (return)
      [ Castra super Tusci si ponere Tybridis undas; (_jubeas_)
      Hesperios audax veniam metator in agros.
      Tu quoscunque voles in planum effundere muros,
      His aries actus disperget saxa lacertis;
      Illa licet penitus tolli quam jusseris urbem
      Roma sit.
      Lucan. Pharsal. i. 381.]


      The legions of Galerius exhibited a very melancholy proof of
      their disposition, by the ravages which they committed in their
      retreat. They murdered, they ravished, they plundered, they drove
      away the flocks and herds of the Italians; they burnt the
      villages through which they passed, and they endeavored to
      destroy the country which it had not been in their power to
      subdue. During the whole march, Maxentius hung on their rear, but
      he very prudently declined a general engagement with those brave
      and desperate veterans. His father had undertaken a second
      journey into Gaul, with the hope of persuading Constantine, who
      had assembled an army on the frontier, to join in the pursuit,
      and to complete the victory. But the actions of Constantine were
      guided by reason, and not by resentment. He persisted in the wise
      resolution of maintaining a balance of power in the divided
      empire, and he no longer hated Galerius, when that aspiring
      prince had ceased to be an object of terror. 28


      28 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 27. Zosim. l. ii. p. 82. The
      latter, that Constantine, in his interview with Maximian, had
      promised to declare war against Galerius.]


      The mind of Galerius was the most susceptible of the sterner
      passions, but it was not, however, incapable of a sincere and
      lasting friendship. Licinius, whose manners as well as character
      were not unlike his own, seems to have engaged both his affection
      and esteem. Their intimacy had commenced in the happier period
      perhaps of their youth and obscurity. It had been cemented by the
      freedom and dangers of a military life; they had advanced almost
      by equal steps through the successive honors of the service; and
      as soon as Galerius was invested with the Imperial dignity, he
      seems to have conceived the design of raising his companion to
      the same rank with himself. During the short period of his
      prosperity, he considered the rank of Cæsar as unworthy of the
      age and merit of Licinius, and rather chose to reserve for him
      the place of Constantius, and the empire of the West. While the
      emperor was employed in the Italian war, he intrusted his friend
      with the defence of the Danube; and immediately after his return
      from that unfortunate expedition, he invested Licinius with the
      vacant purple of Severus, resigning to his immediate command the
      provinces of Illyricum. 29 The news of his promotion was no
      sooner carried into the East, than Maximin, who governed, or
      rather oppressed, the countries of Egypt and Syria, betrayed his
      envy and discontent, disdained the inferior name of Cæsar, and,
      notwithstanding the prayers as well as arguments of Galerius,
      exacted, almost by violence, the equal title of Augustus. 30 For
      the first, and indeed for the last time, the Roman world was
      administered by six emperors. In the West, Constantine and
      Maxentius affected to reverence their father Maximian. In the
      East, Licinius and Maximin honored with more real consideration
      their benefactor Galerius. The opposition of interest, and the
      memory of a recent war, divided the empire into two great hostile
      powers; but their mutual fears produced an apparent tranquillity,
      and even a feigned reconciliation, till the death of the elder
      princes, of Maximian, and more particularly of Galerius, gave a
      new direction to the views and passions of their surviving
      associates.


      29 (return) [ M. de Tillemont (Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iv. part
      i. p. 559) has proved that Licinius, without passing through the
      intermediate rank of Cæsar, was declared Augustus, the 11th of
      November, A. D. 307, after the return of Galerius from Italy.]


      30 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 32. When Galerius declared
      Licinius Augustus with himself, he tried to satisfy his younger
      associates, by inventing for Constantine and Maximin (not
      Maxentius; see Baluze, p. 81) the new title of sons of the
      Augusti. But when Maximin acquainted him that he had been saluted
      Augustus by the army, Galerius was obliged to acknowledge him as
      well as Constantine, as equal associates in the Imperial
      dignity.]


      When Maximian had reluctantly abdicated the empire, the venal
      orators of the times applauded his philosophic moderation. When
      his ambition excited, or at least encouraged, a civil war, they
      returned thanks to his generous patriotism, and gently censured
      that love of ease and retirement which had withdrawn him from the
      public service. 31 But it was impossible that minds like those of
      Maximian and his son could long possess in harmony an undivided
      power. Maxentius considered himself as the legal sovereign of
      Italy, elected by the Roman senate and people; nor would he
      endure the control of his father, who arrogantly declared that by
      _his_ name and abilities the rash youth had been established on
      the throne. The cause was solemnly pleaded before the Prætorian
      guards; and those troops, who dreaded the severity of the old
      emperor, espoused the party of Maxentius. 32 The life and freedom
      of Maximian were, however, respected, and he retired from Italy
      into Illyricum, affecting to lament his past conduct, and
      secretly contriving new mischiefs. But Galerius, who was well
      acquainted with his character, soon obliged him to leave his
      dominions, and the last refuge of the disappointed Maximian was
      the court of his son-in-law Constantine. 33 He was received with
      respect by that artful prince, and with the appearance of filial
      tenderness by the empress Fausta. That he might remove every
      suspicion, he resigned the Imperial purple a second time, 34
      professing himself at length convinced of the vanity of greatness
      and ambition. Had he persevered in this resolution, he might have
      ended his life with less dignity, indeed, than in his first
      retirement, yet, however, with comfort and reputation. But the
      near prospect of a throne brought back to his remembrance the
      state from whence he was fallen, and he resolved, by a desperate
      effort, either to reign or to perish. An incursion of the Franks
      had summoned Constantine, with a part of his army, to the banks
      of the Rhine; the remainder of the troops were stationed in the
      southern provinces of Gaul, which lay exposed to the enterprises
      of the Italian emperor, and a considerable treasure was deposited
      in the city of Arles. Maximian either craftily invented, or
      easily credited, a vain report of the death of Constantine.
      Without hesitation he ascended the throne, seized the treasure,
      and scattering it with his accustomed profusion among the
      soldiers, endeavored to awake in their minds the memory of his
      ancient dignity and exploits. Before he could establish his
      authority, or finish the negotiation which he appears to have
      entered into with his son Maxentius, the celerity of Constantine
      defeated all his hopes. On the first news of his perfidy and
      ingratitude, that prince returned by rapid marches from the Rhine
      to the Saone, embarked on the last-mentioned river at Chalons,
      and, at Lyons trusting himself to the rapidity of the Rhone,
      arrived at the gates of Arles with a military force which it was
      impossible for Maximian to resist, and which scarcely permitted
      him to take refuge in the neighboring city of Marseilles. The
      narrow neck of land which joined that place to the continent was
      fortified against the besiegers, whilst the sea was open, either
      for the escape of Maximian, or for the succor of Maxentius, if
      the latter should choose to disguise his invasion of Gaul under
      the honorable pretence of defending a distressed, or, as he might
      allege, an injured father. Apprehensive of the fatal consequences
      of delay, Constantine gave orders for an immediate assault; but
      the scaling-ladders were found too short for the height of the
      walls, and Marseilles might have sustained as long a siege as it
      formerly did against the arms of Cæsar, if the garrison,
      conscious either of their fault or of their danger, had not
      purchased their pardon by delivering up the city and the person
      of Maximian. A secret but irrevocable sentence of death was
      pronounced against the usurper; he obtained only the same favor
      which he had indulged to Severus, and it was published to the
      world, that, oppressed by the remorse of his repeated crimes, he
      strangled himself with his own hands. After he had lost the
      assistance, and disdained the moderate counsels, of Diocletian,
      the second period of his active life was a series of public
      calamities and personal mortifications, which were terminated, in
      about three years, by an ignominious death. He deserved his fate;
      but we should find more reason to applaud the humanity of
      Constantine, if he had spared an old man, the benefactor of his
      father, and the father of his wife. During the whole of this
      melancholy transaction, it appears that Fausta sacrificed the
      sentiments of nature to her conjugal duties. 35


      31 (return) [ See Panegyr. Vet. vi. 9. Audi doloris nostri
      liberam vocem, &c. The whole passage is imagined with artful
      flattery, and expressed with an easy flow of eloquence.]


      32 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 28. Zosim. l. ii. p. 82. A
      report was spread, that Maxentius was the son of some obscure
      Syrian, and had been substituted by the wife of Maximian as her
      own child. See Aurelius Victor, Anonym. Valesian, and Panegyr.
      Vet. ix. 3, 4.]


      33 (return) [ Ab urbe pulsum, ab Italia fugatum, ab Illyrico
      repudiatum, provinciis, tuis copiis, tuo palatio recepisti.
      Eumen. in Panegyr Vet. vii. 14.]


      34 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 29. Yet, after the
      resignation of the purple, Constantine still continued to
      Maximian the pomp and honors of the Imperial dignity; and on all
      public occasions gave the right hand place to his father-in-law.
      Panegyr. Vet. viii. 15.]


      35 (return) [ Zosim. l. ii. p. 82. Eumenius in Panegyr. Vet. vii.
      16—21. The latter of these has undoubtedly represented the whole
      affair in the most favorable light for his sovereign. Yet even
      from this partial narrative we may conclude, that the repeated
      clemency of Constantine, and the reiterated treasons of Maximian,
      as they are described by Lactantius, (de M. P. c. 29, 30,) and
      copied by the moderns, are destitute of any historical
      foundation. Note: Yet some pagan authors relate and confirm them.
      Aurelius Victor speaking of Maximin, says, cumque specie officii,
      dolis compositis, Constantinum generum tentaret acerbe, jure
      tamen interierat. Aur. Vict. de Cæsar l. p. 623. Eutropius also
      says, inde ad Gallias profectus est (Maximianus) composito
      tamquam a filio esset expulsus, ut Constantino genero jun
      geretur: moliens tamen Constantinum, reperta occasione,
      interficere, dedit justissimo exitu. Eutrop. x. p. 661. (Anon.
      Gent.)—G. —— These writers hardly confirm more than Gibbon
      admits; he denies the repeated clemency of Constantine, and the
      reiterated treasons of Maximian Compare Manso, p. 302.—M.]


      The last years of Galerius were less shameful and unfortunate;
      and though he had filled with more glory the subordinate station
      of Cæsar than the superior rank of Augustus, he preserved, till
      the moment of his death, the first place among the princes of the
      Roman world. He survived his retreat from Italy about four years;
      and wisely relinquishing his views of universal empire, he
      devoted the remainder of his life to the enjoyment of pleasure,
      and to the execution of some works of public utility, among which
      we may distinguish the discharging into the Danube the
      superfluous waters of the Lake Pelso, and the cutting down the
      immense forests that encompassed it; an operation worthy of a
      monarch, since it gave an extensive country to the agriculture of
      his Pannonian subjects. 36 His death was occasioned by a very
      painful and lingering disorder. His body, swelled by an
      intemperate course of life to an unwieldy corpulence, was covered
      with ulcers, and devoured by innumerable swarms of those insects
      which have given their name to a most loathsome disease; 37 but
      as Galerius had offended a very zealous and powerful party among
      his subjects, his sufferings, instead of exciting their
      compassion, have been celebrated as the visible effects of divine
      justice. 38 He had no sooner expired in his palace of Nicomedia,
      than the two emperors who were indebted for their purple to his
      favors, began to collect their forces, with the intention either
      of disputing, or of dividing, the dominions which he had left
      without a master. They were persuaded, however, to desist from
      the former design, and to agree in the latter. The provinces of
      Asia fell to the share of Maximin, and those of Europe augmented
      the portion of Licinius. The Hellespont and the Thracian
      Bosphorus formed their mutual boundary, and the banks of those
      narrow seas, which flowed in the midst of the Roman world, were
      covered with soldiers, with arms, and with fortifications. The
      deaths of Maximian and of Galerius reduced the number of emperors
      to four. The sense of their true interest soon connected Licinius
      and Constantine; a secret alliance was concluded between Maximin
      and Maxentius, and their unhappy subjects expected with terror
      the bloody consequences of their inevitable dissensions, which
      were no longer restrained by the fear or the respect which they
      had entertained for Galerius. 39


      36 (return) [ Aurelius Victor, c. 40. But that lake was situated
      on the upper Pannonia, near the borders of Noricum; and the
      province of Valeria (a name which the wife of Galerius gave to
      the drained country) undoubtedly lay between the Drave and the
      Danube, (Sextus Rufus, c. 9.) I should therefore suspect that
      Victor has confounded the Lake Pelso with the Volocean marshes,
      or, as they are now called, the Lake Sabaton. It is placed in the
      heart of Valeria, and its present extent is not less than twelve
      Hungarian miles (about seventy English) in length, and two in
      breadth. See Severini Pannonia, l. i. c. 9.]


      37 (return) [ Lactantius (de M. P. c. 33) and Eusebius (l. viii.
      c. 16) describe the symptoms and progress of his disorder with
      singular accuracy and apparent pleasure.]


      38 (return) [ If any (like the late Dr. Jortin, Remarks on
      Ecclesiastical History, vol. ii. p. 307—356) still delight in
      recording the wonderful deaths of the persecutors, I would
      recommend to their perusal an admirable passage of Grotius (Hist.
      l. vii. p. 332) concerning the last illness of Philip II. of
      Spain.]


      39 (return) [ See Eusebius, l. ix. 6, 10. Lactantius de M. P. c.
      36. Zosimus is less exact, and evidently confounds Maximian with
      Maximin.]


      Among so many crimes and misfortunes, occasioned by the passions
      of the Roman princes, there is some pleasure in discovering a
      single action which may be ascribed to their virtue. In the sixth
      year of his reign, Constantine visited the city of Autun, and
      generously remitted the arrears of tribute, reducing at the same
      time the proportion of their assessment from twenty-five to
      eighteen thousand heads, subject to the real and personal
      capitation. 40 Yet even this indulgence affords the most
      unquestionable proof of the public misery. This tax was so
      extremely oppressive, either in itself or in the mode of
      collecting it, that whilst the revenue was increased by
      extortion, it was diminished by despair: a considerable part of
      the territory of Autun was left uncultivated; and great numbers
      of the provincials rather chose to live as exiles and outlaws,
      than to support the weight of civil society. It is but too
      probable, that the bountiful emperor relieved, by a partial act
      of liberality, one among the many evils which he had caused by
      his general maxims of administration. But even those maxims were
      less the effect of choice than of necessity. And if we except the
      death of Maximian, the reign of Constantine in Gaul seems to have
      been the most innocent and even virtuous period of his life.


      The provinces were protected by his presence from the inroads of
      the barbarians, who either dreaded or experienced his active
      valor. After a signal victory over the Franks and Alemanni,
      several of their princes were exposed by his order to the wild
      beasts in the amphitheatre of Treves, and the people seem to have
      enjoyed the spectacle, without discovering, in such a treatment
      of royal captives, any thing that was repugnant to the laws of
      nations or of humanity. 41


      40 (return) [ See the viiith Panegyr., in which Eumenius
      displays, in the presence of Constantine, the misery and the
      gratitude of the city of Autun.]


      41 (return) [Eutropius, x. 3. Panegyr. Veter. vii. 10, 11, 12. A
      great number of the French youth were likewise exposed to the
      same cruel and ignominious death Yet the panegyric assumes
      something of an apologetic tone. Te vero Constantine,
      quantumlibet oderint hoses, dum perhorrescant. Hæc est enim vera
      virtus, ut non ament et quiescant. The orator appeals to the
      ancient ideal of the republic.—M.]


      The virtues of Constantine were rendered more illustrious by the
      vices of Maxentius. Whilst the Gallic provinces enjoyed as much
      happiness as the condition of the times was capable of receiving,
      Italy and Africa groaned under the dominion of a tyrant, as
      contemptible as he was odious. The zeal of flattery and faction
      has indeed too frequently sacrificed the reputation of the
      vanquished to the glory of their successful rivals; but even
      those writers who have revealed, with the most freedom and
      pleasure, the faults of Constantine, unanimously confess that
      Maxentius was cruel, rapacious, and profligate. 42 He had the
      good fortune to suppress a slight rebellion in Africa. The
      governor and a few adherents had been guilty; the province
      suffered for their crime. The flourishing cities of Cirtha and
      Carthage, and the whole extent of that fertile country, were
      wasted by fire and sword. The abuse of victory was followed by
      the abuse of law and justice. A formidable army of sycophants and
      delators invaded Africa; the rich and the noble were easily
      convicted of a connection with the rebels; and those among them
      who experienced the emperor’s clemency, were only punished by the
      confiscation of their estates. 43 So signal a victory was
      celebrated by a magnificent triumph, and Maxentius exposed to the
      eyes of the people the spoils and captives of a Roman province.
      The state of the capital was no less deserving of compassion than
      that of Africa. The wealth of Rome supplied an inexhaustible fund
      for his vain and prodigal expenses, and the ministers of his
      revenue were skilled in the arts of rapine. It was under his
      reign that the method of exacting a _free gift_ from the senators
      was first invented; and as the sum was insensibly increased, the
      pretences of levying it, a victory, a birth, a marriage, or an
      imperial consulship, were proportionably multiplied. 44 Maxentius
      had imbibed the same implacable aversion to the senate, which had
      characterized most of the former tyrants of Rome; nor was it
      possible for his ungrateful temper to forgive the generous
      fidelity which had raised him to the throne, and supported him
      against all his enemies. The lives of the senators were exposed
      to his jealous suspicions, the dishonor of their wives and
      daughters heightened the gratification of his sensual passions.
      45 It may be presumed that an Imperial lover was seldom reduced
      to sigh in vain; but whenever persuasion proved ineffectual, he
      had recourse to violence; and there remains _one_ memorable
      example of a noble matron, who preserved her chastity by a
      voluntary death. The soldiers were the only order of men whom he
      appeared to respect, or studied to please. He filled Rome and
      Italy with armed troops, connived at their tumults, suffered them
      with impunity to plunder, and even to massacre, the defenceless
      people; 46 and indulging them in the same licentiousness which
      their emperor enjoyed, Maxentius often bestowed on his military
      favorites the splendid villa, or the beautiful wife, of a
      senator. A prince of such a character, alike incapable of
      governing, either in peace or in war, might purchase the support,
      but he could never obtain the esteem, of the army. Yet his pride
      was equal to his other vices. Whilst he passed his indolent life
      either within the walls of his palace, or in the neighboring
      gardens of Sallust, he was repeatedly heard to declare, that _he
      alone_ was emperor, and that the other princes were no more than
      his lieutenants, on whom he had devolved the defence of the
      frontier provinces, that he might enjoy without interruption the
      elegant luxury of the capital. Rome, which had so long regretted
      the absence, lamented, during the six years of his reign, the
      presence of her sovereign. 47


      42 (return) [ Julian excludes Maxentius from the banquet of the
      Cæsars with abhorrence and contempt; and Zosimus (l. ii. p. 85)
      accuses him of every kind of cruelty and profligacy.]


      43 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 83—85. Aurelius Victor.]


      44 (return) [ The passage of Aurelius Victor should be read in
      the following manner: Primus instituto pessimo, munerum specie,
      Patres Oratores que pecuniam conferre prodigenti sibi cogeret.]


      45 (return) [ Panegyr. Vet. ix. 3. Euseb. Hist Eccles. viii. 14,
      et in Vit. Constant i. 33, 34. Rufinus, c. 17. The virtuous
      matron who stabbed herself to escape the violence of Maxentius,
      was a Christian, wife to the præfect of the city, and her name
      was Sophronia. It still remains a question among the casuists,
      whether, on such occasions, suicide is justifiable.]


      46 (return) [ Prætorianis cædem vulgi quondam annueret, is the
      vague expression of Aurelius Victor. See more particular, though
      somewhat different, accounts of a tumult and massacre which
      happened at Rome, in Eusebius, (l. viii. c. 14,) and in Zosimus,
      (l. ii. p. 84.)]


      47 (return) [ See, in the Panegyrics, (ix. 14,) a lively
      description of the indolence and vain pride of Maxentius. In
      another place the orator observes that the riches which Rome had
      accumulated in a period of 1060 years, were lavished by the
      tyrant on his mercenary bands; redemptis ad civile latrocinium
      manibus in gesserat.]


      Though Constantine might view the conduct of Maxentius with
      abhorrence, and the situation of the Romans with compassion, we
      have no reason to presume that he would have taken up arms to
      punish the one or to relieve the other. But the tyrant of Italy
      rashly ventured to provoke a formidable enemy, whose ambition had
      been hitherto restrained by considerations of prudence, rather
      than by principles of justice. 48 After the death of Maximian,
      his titles, according to the established custom, had been erased,
      and his statues thrown down with ignominy. His son, who had
      persecuted and deserted him when alive, effected to display the
      most pious regard for his memory, and gave orders that a similar
      treatment should be immediately inflicted on all the statues that
      had been erected in Italy and Africa to the honor of Constantine.


      That wise prince, who sincerely wished to decline a war, with the
      difficulty and importance of which he was sufficiently
      acquainted, at first dissembled the insult, and sought for
      redress by the milder expedient of negotiation, till he was
      convinced that the hostile and ambitious designs of the Italian
      emperor made it necessary for him to arm in his own defence.
      Maxentius, who openly avowed his pretensions to the whole
      monarchy of the West, had already prepared a very considerable
      force to invade the Gallic provinces on the side of Rhætia; and
      though he could not expect any assistance from Licinius, he was
      flattered with the hope that the legions of Illyricum, allured by
      his presents and promises, would desert the standard of that
      prince, and unanimously declare themselves his soldiers and
      subjects. 49 Constantine no longer hesitated. He had deliberated
      with caution, he acted with vigor. He gave a private audience to
      the ambassadors, who, in the name of the senate and people,
      conjured him to deliver Rome from a detested tyrant; and without
      regarding the timid remonstrances of his council, he resolved to
      prevent the enemy, and to carry the war into the heart of Italy.
      50


      48 (return) [ After the victory of Constantine, it was
      universally allowed, that the motive of delivering the republic
      from a detested tyrant, would, at any time, have justified his
      expedition into Italy. Euseb in Vi’. Constantin. l. i. c. 26.
      Panegyr. Vet. ix. 2.]


      49 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 84, 85. Nazarius in Panegyr. x.
      7—13.]


      50 (return) [ See Panegyr. Vet. ix. 2. Omnibus fere tuis
      Comitibus et Ducibus non solum tacite mussantibus, sed etiam
      aperte timentibus; contra consilia hominum, contra Haruspicum
      monita, ipse per temet liberandæ arbis tempus venisse sentires.
      The embassy of the Romans is mentioned only by Zonaras, (l.
      xiii.,) and by Cedrenus, (in Compend. Hist. p. 370;) but those
      modern Greeks had the opportunity of consulting many writers
      which have since been lost, among which we may reckon the life of
      Constantine by Praxagoras. Photius (p. 63) has made a short
      extract from that historical work.]


      The enterprise was as full of danger as of glory; and the
      unsuccessful event of two former invasions was sufficient to
      inspire the most serious apprehensions. The veteran troops, who
      revered the name of Maximian, had embraced in both those wars the
      party of his son, and were now restrained by a sense of honor, as
      well as of interest, from entertaining an idea of a second
      desertion. Maxentius, who considered the Prætorian guards as the
      firmest defence of his throne, had increased them to their
      ancient establishment; and they composed, including the rest of
      the Italians who were enlisted into his service, a formidable
      body of fourscore thousand men. Forty thousand Moors and
      Carthaginians had been raised since the reduction of Africa. Even
      Sicily furnished its proportion of troops; and the armies of
      Maxentius amounted to one hundred and seventy thousand foot and
      eighteen thousand horse. The wealth of Italy supplied the
      expenses of the war; and the adjacent provinces were exhausted,
      to form immense magazines of corn and every other kind of
      provisions.


      The whole force of Constantine consisted of ninety thousand foot
      and eight thousand horse; 51 and as the defence of the Rhine
      required an extraordinary attention during the absence of the
      emperor, it was not in his power to employ above half his troops
      in the Italian expedition, unless he sacrificed the public safety
      to his private quarrel. 52 At the head of about forty thousand
      soldiers he marched to encounter an enemy whose numbers were at
      least four times superior to his own. But the armies of Rome,
      placed at a secure distance from danger, were enervated by
      indulgence and luxury. Habituated to the baths and theatres of
      Rome, they took the field with reluctance, and were chiefly
      composed of veterans who had almost forgotten, or of new levies
      who had never acquired, the use of arms and the practice of war.
      The hardy legions of Gaul had long defended the frontiers of the
      empire against the barbarians of the North; and in the
      performance of that laborious service, their valor was exercised
      and their discipline confirmed. There appeared the same
      difference between the leaders as between the armies. Caprice or
      flattery had tempted Maxentius with the hopes of conquest; but
      these aspiring hopes soon gave way to the habits of pleasure and
      the consciousness of his inexperience. The intrepid mind of
      Constantine had been trained from his earliest youth to war, to
      action, and to military command.


      51 (return) [ Zosimus (l. ii. p. 86) has given us this curious
      account of the forces on both sides. He makes no mention of any
      naval armaments, though we are assured (Panegyr. Vet. ix. 25)
      that the war was carried on by sea as well as by land; and that
      the fleet of Constantine took possession of Sardinia, Corsica,
      and the ports of Italy.]


      52 (return) [ Panegyr. Vet. ix. 3. It is not surprising that the
      orator should diminish the numbers with which his sovereign
      achieved the conquest of Italy; but it appears somewhat singular
      that he should esteem the tyrant’s army at no more than 100,000
      men.]


      Chapter XIV: Six Emperors At The Same Time, Reunion Of The
      Empire.—Part III.


      When Hannibal marched from Gaul into Italy, he was obliged, first
      to discover, and then to open, a way over mountains, and through
      savage nations, that had never yielded a passage to a regular
      army. 53 The Alps were then guarded by nature, they are now
      fortified by art. Citadels, constructed with no less skill than
      labor and expense, command every avenue into the plain, and on
      that side render Italy almost inaccessible to the enemies of the
      king of Sardinia. 54 But in the course of the intermediate
      period, the generals, who have attempted the passage, have seldom
      experienced any difficulty or resistance. In the age of
      Constantine, the peasants of the mountains were civilized and
      obedient subjects; the country was plentifully stocked with
      provisions, and the stupendous highways, which the Romans had
      carried over the Alps, opened several communications between Gaul
      and Italy. 55 Constantine preferred the road of the Cottian Alps,
      or, as it is now called, of Mount Cenis, and led his troops with
      such active diligence, that he descended into the plain of
      Piedmont before the court of Maxentius had received any certain
      intelligence of his departure from the banks of the Rhine. The
      city of Susa, however, which is situated at the foot of Mount
      Cenis, was surrounded with walls, and provided with a garrison
      sufficiently numerous to check the progress of an invader; but
      the impatience of Constantine’s troops disdained the tedious
      forms of a siege. The same day that they appeared before Susa,
      they applied fire to the gates, and ladders to the walls; and
      mounting to the assault amidst a shower of stones and arrows,
      they entered the place sword in hand, and cut in pieces the
      greatest part of the garrison. The flames were extinguished by
      the care of Constantine, and the remains of Susa preserved from
      total destruction. About forty miles from thence, a more severe
      contest awaited him. A numerous army of Italians was assembled
      under the lieutenants of Maxentius, in the plains of Turin. Its
      principal strength consisted in a species of heavy cavalry, which
      the Romans, since the decline of their discipline, had borrowed
      from the nations of the East. The horses, as well as the men,
      were clothed in complete armor, the joints of which were artfully
      adapted to the motions of their bodies. The aspect of this
      cavalry was formidable, their weight almost irresistible; and as,
      on this occasion, their generals had drawn them up in a compact
      column or wedge, with a sharp point, and with spreading flanks,
      they flattered themselves that they could easily break and
      trample down the army of Constantine. They might, perhaps, have
      succeeded in their design, had not their experienced adversary
      embraced the same method of defence, which in similar
      circumstances had been practised by Aurelian. The skilful
      evolutions of Constantine divided and baffled this massy column
      of cavalry. The troops of Maxentius fled in confusion towards
      Turin; and as the gates of the city were shut against them, very
      few escaped the sword of the victorious pursuers. By this
      important service, Turin deserved to experience the clemency and
      even favor of the conqueror. He made his entry into the Imperial
      palace of Milan, and almost all the cities of Italy between the
      Alps and the Po not only acknowledged the power, but embraced
      with zeal the party, of Constantine. 56


      53 (return) [ The three principal passages of the Alps between
      Gaul and Italy, are those of Mount St. Bernard, Mount Cenis, and
      Mount Genevre. Tradition, and a resemblance of names, (Alpes
      Penninoe,) had assigned the first of these for the march of
      Hannibal, (see Simler de Alpibus.) The Chevalier de Folard
      (Polyp. tom. iv.) and M. d’Anville have led him over Mount
      Genevre. But notwithstanding the authority of an experienced
      officer and a learned geographer, the pretensions of Mount Cenis
      are supported in a specious, not to say a convincing, manner, by
      M. Grosley. Observations sur l’Italie, tom. i. p. 40, &c. ——The
      dissertation of Messrs. Cramer and Wickham has clearly shown that
      the Little St. Bernard must claim the honor of Hannibal’s
      passage. Mr. Long (London, 1831) has added some sensible
      corrections re Hannibal’s march to the Alps.—M]


      54 (return) [ La Brunette near Suse, Demont, Exiles,
      Fenestrelles, Coni, &c.]


      55 (return) [ See Ammian. Marcellin. xv. 10. His description of
      the roads over the Alps is clear, lively, and accurate.]


      56 (return) [ Zosimus as well as Eusebius hasten from the passage
      of the Alps to the decisive action near Rome. We must apply to
      the two Panegyrics for the intermediate actions of Constantine.]


      From Milan to Rome, the Æmilian and Flaminian highways offered an
      easy march of about four hundred miles; but though Constantine
      was impatient to encounter the tyrant, he prudently directed his
      operations against another army of Italians, who, by their
      strength and position, might either oppose his progress, or, in
      case of a misfortune, might intercept his retreat. Ruricius
      Pompeianus, a general distinguished by his valor and ability, had
      under his command the city of Verona, and all the troops that
      were stationed in the province of Venetia. As soon as he was
      informed that Constantine was advancing towards him, he detached
      a large body of cavalry, which was defeated in an engagement near
      Brescia, and pursued by the Gallic legions as far as the gates of
      Verona. The necessity, the importance, and the difficulties of
      the siege of Verona, immediately presented themselves to the
      sagacious mind of Constantine. 57 The city was accessible only by
      a narrow peninsula towards the west, as the other three sides
      were surrounded by the Adige, a rapid river, which covered the
      province of Venetia, from whence the besieged derived an
      inexhaustible supply of men and provisions. It was not without
      great difficulty, and after several fruitless attempts, that
      Constantine found means to pass the river at some distance above
      the city, and in a place where the torrent was less violent. He
      then encompassed Verona with strong lines, pushed his attacks
      with prudent vigor, and repelled a desperate sally of Pompeianus.
      That intrepid general, when he had used every means of defence
      that the strength of the place or that of the garrison could
      afford, secretly escaped from Verona, anxious not for his own,
      but for the public safety. With indefatigable diligence he soon
      collected an army sufficient either to meet Constantine in the
      field, or to attack him if he obstinately remained within his
      lines. The emperor, attentive to the motions, and informed of the
      approach of so formidable an enemy, left a part of his legions to
      continue the operations of the siege, whilst, at the head of
      those troops on whose valor and fidelity he more particularly
      depended, he advanced in person to engage the general of
      Maxentius. The army of Gaul was drawn up in two lines, according
      to the usual practice of war; but their experienced leader,
      perceiving that the numbers of the Italians far exceeded his own,
      suddenly changed his disposition, and, reducing the second,
      extended the front of his first line to a just proportion with
      that of the enemy. Such evolutions, which only veteran troops can
      execute without confusion in a moment of danger, commonly prove
      decisive; but as this engagement began towards the close of the
      day, and was contested with great obstinacy during the whole
      night, there was less room for the conduct of the generals than
      for the courage of the soldiers. The return of light displayed
      the victory of Constantine, and a field of carnage covered with
      many thousands of the vanquished Italians. Their general,
      Pompeianus, was found among the slain; Verona immediately
      surrendered at discretion, and the garrison was made prisoners of
      war. 58 When the officers of the victorious army congratulated
      their master on this important success, they ventured to add some
      respectful complaints, of such a nature, however, as the most
      jealous monarchs will listen to without displeasure. They
      represented to Constantine, that, not contented with all the
      duties of a commander, he had exposed his own person with an
      excess of valor which almost degenerated into rashness; and they
      conjured him for the future to pay more regard to the
      preservation of a life in which the safety of Rome and of the
      empire was involved. 59


      57 (return) [ The Marquis Maffei has examined the siege and
      battle of Verona with that degree of attention and accuracy which
      was due to a memorable action that happened in his native
      country. The fortifications of that city, constructed by
      Gallienus, were less extensive than the modern walls, and the
      amphitheatre was not included within their circumference. See
      Verona Illustrata, part i. p. 142 150.]


      58 (return) [ They wanted chains for so great a multitude of
      captives; and the whole council was at a loss; but the sagacious
      conqueror imagined the happy expedient of converting into fetters
      the swords of the vanquished. Panegyr. Vet. ix. 11.]


      59 (return) [ Panegyr. Vet. ix. 11.]


      While Constantine signalized his conduct and valor in the field,
      the sovereign of Italy appeared insensible of the calamities and
      danger of a civil war which reigned in the heart of his
      dominions. Pleasure was still the only business of Maxentius.
      Concealing, or at least attempting to conceal, from the public
      knowledge the misfortunes of his arms, 60 he indulged himself in
      a vain confidence which deferred the remedies of the approaching
      evil, without deferring the evil itself. 61 The rapid progress of
      Constantine 62 was scarcely sufficient to awaken him from his
      fatal security; he flattered himself, that his well-known
      liberality, and the majesty of the Roman name, which had already
      delivered him from two invasions, would dissipate with the same
      facility the rebellious army of Gaul. The officers of experience
      and ability, who had served under the banners of Maximian, were
      at length compelled to inform his effeminate son of the imminent
      danger to which he was reduced; and, with a freedom that at once
      surprised and convinced him, to urge the necessity of preventing
      his ruin by a vigorous exertion of his remaining power. The
      resources of Maxentius, both of men and money, were still
      considerable. The Prætorian guards felt how strongly their own
      interest and safety were connected with his cause; and a third
      army was soon collected, more numerous than those which had been
      lost in the battles of Turin and Verona. It was far from the
      intention of the emperor to lead his troops in person. A stranger
      to the exercises of war, he trembled at the apprehension of so
      dangerous a contest; and as fear is commonly superstitious, he
      listened with melancholy attention to the rumors of omens and
      presages which seemed to menace his life and empire. Shame at
      length supplied the place of courage, and forced him to take the
      field. He was unable to sustain the contempt of the Roman people.
      The circus resounded with their indignant clamors, and they
      tumultuously besieged the gates of the palace, reproaching the
      pusillanimity of their indolent sovereign, and celebrating the
      heroic spirit of Constantine. 63 Before Maxentius left Rome, he
      consulted the Sibylline books. The guardians of these ancient
      oracles were as well versed in the arts of this world as they
      were ignorant of the secrets of fate; and they returned him a
      very prudent answer, which might adapt itself to the event, and
      secure their reputation, whatever should be the chance of arms.
      64


      60 (return) [ Literas calamitatum suarum indices supprimebat.
      Panegyr Vet. ix. 15.]


      61 (return) [ Remedia malorum potius quam mala differebat, is the
      fine censure which Tacitus passes on the supine indolence of
      Vitellius.]


      62 (return) [ The Marquis Maffei has made it extremely probable
      that Constantine was still at Verona, the 1st of September, A.D.
      312, and that the memorable æra of the indications was dated from
      his conquest of the Cisalpine Gaul.]


      63 (return) [ See Panegyr. Vet. xi. 16. Lactantius de M. P. c.
      44.]


      64 (return) [ Illo die hostem Romanorum esse periturum. The
      vanquished became of course the enemy of Rome.]


      The celerity of Constantine’s march has been compared to the
      rapid conquest of Italy by the first of the Cæsars; nor is the
      flattering parallel repugnant to the truth of history, since no
      more than fifty-eight days elapsed between the surrender of
      Verona and the final decision of the war. Constantine had always
      apprehended that the tyrant would consult the dictates of fear,
      and perhaps of prudence; and that, instead of risking his last
      hopes in a general engagement, he would shut himself up within
      the walls of Rome. His ample magazines secured him against the
      danger of famine; and as the situation of Constantine admitted
      not of delay, he might have been reduced to the sad necessity of
      destroying with fire and sword the Imperial city, the noblest
      reward of his victory, and the deliverance of which had been the
      motive, or rather indeed the pretence, of the civil war. 65 It
      was with equal surprise and pleasure, that on his arrival at a
      place called Saxa Rubra, about nine miles from Rome, 66 he
      discovered the army of Maxentius prepared to give him battle. 67
      Their long front filled a very spacious plain, and their deep
      array reached to the banks of the Tyber, which covered their
      rear, and forbade their retreat. We are informed, and we may
      believe, that Constantine disposed his troops with consummate
      skill, and that he chose for himself the post of honor and
      danger. Distinguished by the splendor of his arms, he charged in
      person the cavalry of his rival; and his irresistible attack
      determined the fortune of the day. The cavalry of Maxentius was
      principally composed either of unwieldy cuirassiers, or of light
      Moors and Numidians. They yielded to the vigor of the Gallic
      horse, which possessed more activity than the one, more firmness
      than the other. The defeat of the two wings left the infantry
      without any protection on its flanks, and the undisciplined
      Italians fled without reluctance from the standard of a tyrant
      whom they had always hated, and whom they no longer feared. The
      Prætorians, conscious that their offences were beyond the reach
      of mercy, were animated by revenge and despair. Notwithstanding
      their repeated efforts, those brave veterans were unable to
      recover the victory: they obtained, however, an honorable death;
      and it was observed that their bodies covered the same ground
      which had been occupied by their ranks. 68 The confusion then
      became general, and the dismayed troops of Maxentius, pursued by
      an implacable enemy, rushed by thousands into the deep and rapid
      stream of the Tyber. The emperor himself attempted to escape back
      into the city over the Milvian bridge; but the crowds which
      pressed together through that narrow passage forced him into the
      river, where he was immediately drowned by the weight of his
      armor. 69 His body, which had sunk very deep into the mud, was
      found with some difficulty the next day. The sight of his head,
      when it was exposed to the eyes of the people, convinced them of
      their deliverance, and admonished them to receive with
      acclamations of loyalty and gratitude the fortunate Constantine,
      who thus achieved by his valor and ability the most splendid
      enterprise of his life. 70


      65 (return) [ See Panegyr. Vet. ix. 16, x. 27. The former of
      these orators magnifies the hoards of corn, which Maxentius had
      collected from Africa and the Islands. And yet, if there is any
      truth in the scarcity mentioned by Eusebius, (in Vit. Constantin.
      l. i. c. 36,) the Imperial granaries must have been open only to
      the soldiers.]


      66 (return) [ Maxentius... tandem urbe in Saxa Rubra, millia
      ferme novem ægerrime progressus. Aurelius Victor. See Cellarius
      Geograph. Antiq. tom. i. p. 463. Saxa Rubra was in the
      neighborhood of the Cremera, a trifling rivulet, illustrated by
      the valor and glorious death of the three hundred Fabii.]


      67 (return) [ The post which Maxentius had taken, with the Tyber
      in his rear is very clearly described by the two Panegyrists, ix.
      16, x. 28.]


      68 (return) [ Exceptis latrocinii illius primis auctoribus, qui
      desperata venia ocum quem pugnæ sumpserant texere corporibus.
      Panegyr. Vet 17.]


      69 (return) [ A very idle rumor soon prevailed, that Maxentius,
      who had not taken any precaution for his own retreat, had
      contrived a very artful snare to destroy the army of the
      pursuers; but that the wooden bridge, which was to have been
      loosened on the approach of Constantine, unluckily broke down
      under the weight of the flying Italians. M. de Tillemont (Hist.
      des Empereurs, tom. iv. part i. p. 576) very seriously examines
      whether, in contradiction to common sense, the testimony of
      Eusebius and Zosimus ought to prevail over the silence of
      Lactantius, Nazarius, and the anonymous, but contemporary orator,
      who composed the ninth Panegyric. * Note: Manso (Beylage, vi.)
      examines the question, and adduces two manifest allusions to the
      bridge, from the Life of Constantine by Praxagoras, and from
      Libanius. Is it not very probable that such a bridge was thrown
      over the river to facilitate the advance, and to secure the
      retreat, of the army of Maxentius? In case of defeat, orders were
      given for destroying it, in order to check the pursuit: it broke
      down accidentally, or in the confusion was destroyed, as has not
      unfrequently been the case, before the proper time.—M.]


      70 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 86-88, and the two Panegyrics,
      the former of which was pronounced a few months afterwards,
      afford the clearest notion of this great battle. Lactantius,
      Eusebius, and even the Epitomes, supply several useful hints.]


      In the use of victory, Constantine neither deserved the praise of
      clemency, nor incurred the censure of immoderate rigor. 71 He
      inflicted the same treatment to which a defeat would have exposed
      his own person and family, put to death the two sons of the
      tyrant, and carefully extirpated his whole race. The most
      distinguished adherents of Maxentius must have expected to share
      his fate, as they had shared his prosperity and his crimes; but
      when the Roman people loudly demanded a greater number of
      victims, the conqueror resisted, with firmness and humanity,
      those servile clamors, which were dictated by flattery as well as
      by resentment. Informers were punished and discouraged; the
      innocent, who had suffered under the late tyranny, were recalled
      from exile, and restored to their estates. A general act of
      oblivion quieted the minds and settled the property of the
      people, both in Italy and in Africa. 72 The first time that
      Constantine honored the senate with his presence, he
      recapitulated his own services and exploits in a modest oration,
      assured that illustrious order of his sincere regard, and
      promised to reëstablish its ancient dignity and privileges. The
      grateful senate repaid these unmeaning professions by the empty
      titles of honor, which it was yet in their power to bestow; and
      without presuming to ratify the authority of Constantine, they
      passed a decree to assign him the first rank among the three
      _Augusti_ who governed the Roman world. 73 Games and festivals
      were instituted to preserve the fame of his victory, and several
      edifices, raised at the expense of Maxentius, were dedicated to
      the honor of his successful rival. The triumphal arch of
      Constantine still remains a melancholy proof of the decline of
      the arts, and a singular testimony of the meanest vanity. As it
      was not possible to find in the capital of the empire a sculptor
      who was capable of adorning that public monument, the arch of
      Trajan, without any respect either for his memory or for the
      rules of propriety, was stripped of its most elegant figures. The
      difference of times and persons, of actions and characters, was
      totally disregarded. The Parthian captives appear prostrate at
      the feet of a prince who never carried his arms beyond the
      Euphrates; and curious antiquarians can still discover the head
      of Trajan on the trophies of Constantine. The new ornaments which
      it was necessary to introduce between the vacancies of ancient
      sculpture are executed in the rudest and most unskilful manner.
      74


      71 (return) [ Zosimus, the enemy of Constantine, allows (l. ii.
      p. 88) that only a few of the friends of Maxentius were put to
      death; but we may remark the expressive passage of Nazarius,
      (Panegyr. Vet. x. 6.) Omnibus qui labefactari statum ejus
      poterant cum stirpe deletis. The other orator (Panegyr. Vet. ix.
      20, 21) contents himself with observing, that Constantine, when
      he entered Rome, did not imitate the cruel massacres of Cinna, of
      Marius, or of Sylla. * Note: This may refer to the son or sons of
      Maxentius.—M.]


      72 (return) [ See the two Panegyrics, and the laws of this and
      the ensuing year, in the Theodosian Code.]


      73 (return) [ Panegyr. Vet. ix. 20. Lactantius de M. P. c. 44.
      Maximin, who was confessedly the eldest Cæsar, claimed, with some
      show of reason, the first rank among the Augusti.]


      74 (return) [ Adhuc cuncta opera quæ magnifice construxerat,
      urbis fanum atque basilicam, Flavii meritis patres sacravere.
      Aurelius Victor. With regard to the theft of Trajan’s trophies,
      consult Flaminius Vacca, apud Montfaucon, Diarium Italicum, p.
      250, and l’Antiquite Expliquee of the latter, tom. iv. p. 171.]


      The final abolition of the Prætorian guards was a measure of
      prudence as well as of revenge. Those haughty troops, whose
      numbers and privileges had been restored, and even augmented, by
      Maxentius, were forever suppressed by Constantine. Their
      fortified camp was destroyed, and the few Prætorians who had
      escaped the fury of the sword were dispersed among the legions,
      and banished to the frontiers of the empire, where they might be
      serviceable without again becoming dangerous. 75 By suppressing
      the troops which were usually stationed in Rome, Constantine gave
      the fatal blow to the dignity of the senate and people, and the
      disarmed capital was exposed without protection to the insults or
      neglect of its distant master. We may observe, that in this last
      effort to preserve their expiring freedom, the Romans, from the
      apprehension of a tribute, had raised Maxentius to the throne. He
      exacted that tribute from the senate under the name of a free
      gift. They implored the assistance of Constantine. He vanquished
      the tyrant, and converted the free gift into a perpetual tax. The
      senators, according to the declaration which was required of
      their property, were divided into several classes. The most
      opulent paid annually eight pounds of gold, the next class paid
      four, the last two, and those whose poverty might have claimed an
      exemption, were assessed, however, at seven pieces of gold.
      Besides the regular members of the senate, their sons, their
      descendants, and even their relations, enjoyed the vain
      privileges, and supported the heavy burdens, of the senatorial
      order; nor will it any longer excite our surprise, that
      Constantine should be attentive to increase the number of persons
      who were included under so useful a description. 76 After the
      defeat of Maxentius, the victorious emperor passed no more than
      two or three months in Rome, which he visited twice during the
      remainder of his life, to celebrate the solemn festivals of the
      tenth and of the twentieth years of his reign. Constantine was
      almost perpetually in motion, to exercise the legions, or to
      inspect the state of the provinces. Treves, Milan, Aquileia,
      Sirmium, Naissus, and Thessalonica, were the occasional places of
      his residence, till he founded a new Rome on the confines of
      Europe and Asia. 77


      75 (return) [ Prætoriæ legiones ac subsidia factionibus aptiora
      quam urbi Romæ, sublata penitus; simul arma atque usus indumenti
      militaris Aurelius Victor. Zosimus (l. ii. p. 89) mentions this
      fact as an historian, and it is very pompously celebrated in the
      ninth Panegyric.]


      76 (return) [ Ex omnibus provinciis optimates viros Curiæ tuæ
      pigneraveris ut Senatus dignitas.... ex totius Orbis flore
      consisteret. Nazarius in Panegyr. Vet x. 35. The word
      pigneraveris might almost seem maliciously chosen. Concerning the
      senatorial tax, see Zosimus, l. ii. p. 115, the second title of
      the sixth book of the Theodosian Code, with Godefroy’s
      Commentary, and Memoires de l’Academic des Inscriptions, tom.
      xxviii. p. 726.]


      77 (return) [ From the Theodosian Code, we may now begin to trace
      the motions of the emperors; but the dates both of time and place
      have frequently been altered by the carelessness of
      transcribers.]


      Before Constantine marched into Italy, he had secured the
      friendship, or at least the neutrality, of Licinius, the Illyrian
      emperor. He had promised his sister Constantia in marriage to
      that prince; but the celebration of the nuptials was deferred
      till after the conclusion of the war, and the interview of the
      two emperors at Milan, which was appointed for that purpose,
      appeared to cement the union of their families and interests. 78
      In the midst of the public festivity they were suddenly obliged
      to take leave of each other. An inroad of the Franks summoned
      Constantine to the Rhine, and the hostile approach of the
      sovereign of Asia demanded the immediate presence of Licinius.
      Maximin had been the secret ally of Maxentius, and without being
      discouraged by his fate, he resolved to try the fortune of a
      civil war. He moved out of Syria, towards the frontiers of
      Bithynia, in the depth of winter. The season was severe and
      tempestuous; great numbers of men as well as horses perished in
      the snow; and as the roads were broken up by incessant rains, he
      was obliged to leave behind him a considerable part of the heavy
      baggage, which was unable to follow the rapidity of his forced
      marches. By this extraordinary effort of diligence, he arrived
      with a harassed but formidable army, on the banks of the Thracian
      Bosphorus before the lieutenants of Licinius were apprised of his
      hostile intentions. Byzantium surrendered to the power of
      Maximin, after a siege of eleven days. He was detained some days
      under the walls of Heraclea; and he had no sooner taken
      possession of that city than he was alarmed by the intelligence
      that Licinius had pitched his camp at the distance of only
      eighteen miles. After a fruitless negotiation, in which the two
      princes attempted to seduce the fidelity of each other’s
      adherents, they had recourse to arms. The emperor of the East
      commanded a disciplined and veteran army of above seventy
      thousand men; and Licinius, who had collected about thirty
      thousand Illyrians, was at first oppressed by the superiority of
      numbers. His military skill, and the firmness of his troops,
      restored the day, and obtained a decisive victory. The incredible
      speed which Maximin exerted in his flight is much more celebrated
      than his prowess in the battle. Twenty-four hours afterwards he
      was seen, pale, trembling, and without his Imperial ornaments, at
      Nicomedia, one hundred and sixty miles from the place of his
      defeat. The wealth of Asia was yet unexhausted; and though the
      flower of his veterans had fallen in the late action, he had
      still power, if he could obtain time, to draw very numerous
      levies from Syria and Egypt. But he survived his misfortune only
      three or four months. His death, which happened at Tarsus, was
      variously ascribed to despair, to poison, and to the divine
      justice. As Maximin was alike destitute of abilities and of
      virtue, he was lamented neither by the people nor by the
      soldiers. The provinces of the East, delivered from the terrors
      of civil war, cheerfully acknowledged the authority of Licinius.
      79


      78 (return) [ Zosimus (l. ii. p. 89) observes, that before the
      war the sister of Constantine had been betrothed to Licinius.
      According to the younger Victor, Diocletian was invited to the
      nuptials; but having ventured to plead his age and infirmities,
      he received a second letter, filled with reproaches for his
      supposed partiality to the cause of Maxentius and Maximin.]


      79 (return) [ Zosimus mentions the defeat and death of Maximin as
      ordinary events; but Lactantius expatiates on them, (de M. P. c.
      45-50,) ascribing them to the miraculous interposition of Heaven.
      Licinius at that time was one of the protectors of the church.]


      The vanquished emperor left behind him two children, a boy of
      about eight, and a girl of about seven, years old. Their
      inoffensive age might have excited compassion; but the compassion
      of Licinius was a very feeble resource, nor did it restrain him
      from _extinguishing_ the name and memory of his adversary. The
      death of Severianus will admit of less excuse, as it was dictated
      neither by revenge nor by policy. The conqueror had never
      received any injury from the father of that unhappy youth, and
      the short and obscure reign of Severus, in a distant part of the
      empire, was already forgotten. But the execution of Candidianus
      was an act of the blackest cruelty and ingratitude. He was the
      natural son of Galerius, the friend and benefactor of Licinius.
      The prudent father had judged him too young to sustain the weight
      of a diadem; but he hoped that, under the protection of princes
      who were indebted to his favor for the Imperial purple,
      Candidianus might pass a secure and honorable life. He was now
      advancing towards the twentieth year of his age, and the royalty
      of his birth, though unsupported either by merit or ambition, was
      sufficient to exasperate the jealous mind of Licinius. 80 To
      these innocent and illustrious victims of his tyranny, we must
      add the wife and daughter of the emperor Diocletian. When that
      prince conferred on Galerius the title of Cæsar, he had given him
      in marriage his daughter Valeria, whose melancholy adventures
      might furnish a very singular subject for tragedy. She had
      fulfilled and even surpassed the duties of a wife. As she had not
      any children herself, she condescended to adopt the illegitimate
      son of her husband, and invariably displayed towards the unhappy
      Candidianus the tenderness and anxiety of a real mother. After
      the death of Galerius, her ample possessions provoked the
      avarice, and her personal attractions excited the desires, of his
      successor, Maximin. 81 He had a wife still alive; but divorce was
      permitted by the Roman law, and the fierce passions of the tyrant
      demanded an immediate gratification. The answer of Valeria was
      such as became the daughter and widow of emperors; but it was
      tempered by the prudence which her defenceless condition
      compelled her to observe. She represented to the persons whom
      Maximin had employed on this occasion, “that even if honor could
      permit a woman of her character and dignity to entertain a
      thought of second nuptials, decency at least must forbid her to
      listen to his addresses at a time when the ashes of her husband
      and his benefactor were still warm, and while the sorrows of her
      mind were still expressed by her mourning garments. She ventured
      to declare, that she could place very little confidence in the
      professions of a man whose cruel inconstancy was capable of
      repudiating a faithful and affectionate wife.” 82 On this
      repulse, the love of Maximin was converted into fury; and as
      witnesses and judges were always at his disposal, it was easy for
      him to cover his fury with an appearance of legal proceedings,
      and to assault the reputation as well as the happiness of
      Valeria. Her estates were confiscated, her eunuchs and domestics
      devoted to the most inhuman tortures; and several innocent and
      respectable matrons, who were honored with her friendship,
      suffered death, on a false accusation of adultery. The empress
      herself, together with her mother Prisca, was condemned to exile;
      and as they were ignominiously hurried from place to place before
      they were confined to a sequestered village in the deserts of
      Syria, they exposed their shame and distress to the provinces of
      the East, which, during thirty years, had respected their august
      dignity. Diocletian made several ineffectual efforts to alleviate
      the misfortunes of his daughter; and, as the last return that he
      expected for the Imperial purple, which he had conferred upon
      Maximin, he entreated that Valeria might be permitted to share
      his retirement of Salona, and to close the eyes of her afflicted
      father. 83 He entreated; but as he could no longer threaten, his
      prayers were received with coldness and disdain; and the pride of
      Maximin was gratified, in treating Diocletian as a suppliant, and
      his daughter as a criminal. The death of Maximin seemed to assure
      the empresses of a favorable alteration in their fortune. The
      public disorders relaxed the vigilance of their guard, and they
      easily found means to escape from the place of their exile, and
      to repair, though with some precaution, and in disguise, to the
      court of Licinius. His behavior, in the first days of his reign,
      and the honorable reception which he gave to young Candidianus,
      inspired Valeria with a secret satisfaction, both on her own
      account and on that of her adopted son. But these grateful
      prospects were soon succeeded by horror and astonishment; and the
      bloody executions which stained the palace of Nicomedia
      sufficiently convinced her that the throne of Maximin was filled
      by a tyrant more inhuman than himself. Valeria consulted her
      safety by a hasty flight, and, still accompanied by her mother
      Prisca, they wandered above fifteen months 84 through the
      provinces, concealed in the disguise of plebeian habits. They
      were at length discovered at Thessalonica; and as the sentence of
      their death was already pronounced, they were immediately
      beheaded, and their bodies thrown into the sea. The people gazed
      on the melancholy spectacle; but their grief and indignation were
      suppressed by the terrors of a military guard. Such was the
      unworthy fate of the wife and daughter of Diocletian. We lament
      their misfortunes, we cannot discover their crimes; and whatever
      idea we may justly entertain of the cruelty of Licinius, it
      remains a matter of surprise that he was not contented with some
      more secret and decent method of revenge. 85


      80 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 50. Aurelius Victor touches
      on the different conduct of Licinius, and of Constantine, in the
      use of victory.]


      81 (return) [ The sensual appetites of Maximin were gratified at
      the expense of his subjects. His eunuchs, who forced away wives
      and virgins, examined their naked charms with anxious curiosity,
      lest any part of their body should be found unworthy of the royal
      embraces. Coyness and disdain were considered as treason, and the
      obstinate fair one was condemned to be drowned. A custom was
      gradually introduced, that no person should marry a wife without
      the permission of the emperor, “ut ipse in omnibus nuptiis
      prægustator esset.” Lactantius de M. P. c. 38.]


      82 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 39.]


      83 (return) [ Diocletian at last sent cognatum suum, quendam
      militarem æ potentem virum, to intercede in favor of his
      daughter, (Lactantius de M. P. c. 41.) We are not sufficiently
      acquainted with the history of these times to point out the
      person who was employed.]


      84 (return) [ Valeria quoque per varias provincias quindecim
      mensibus plebeio cultu pervagata. Lactantius de M. P. c. 51.
      There is some doubt whether we should compute the fifteen months
      from the moment of her exile, or from that of her escape. The
      expression of parvagata seems to denote the latter; but in that
      case we must suppose that the treatise of Lactantius was written
      after the first civil war between Licinius and Constantine. See
      Cuper, p. 254.]


      85 (return) [ Ita illis pudicitia et conditio exitio fuit.
      Lactantius de M. P. c. 51. He relates the misfortunes of the
      innocent wife and daughter of Discletian with a very natural
      mixture of pity and exultation.]


      The Roman world was now divided between Constantine and Licinius,
      the former of whom was master of the West, and the latter of the
      East. It might perhaps have been expected that the conquerors,
      fatigued with civil war, and connected by a private as well as
      public alliance, would have renounced, or at least would have
      suspended, any further designs of ambition. And yet a year had
      scarcely elapsed after the death of Maximin, before the
      victorious emperors turned their arms against each other. The
      genius, the success, and the aspiring temper of Constantine, may
      seem to mark him out as the aggressor; but the perfidious
      character of Licinius justifies the most unfavorable suspicions,
      and by the faint light which history reflects on this
      transaction, 86 we may discover a conspiracy fomented by his arts
      against the authority of his colleague. Constantine had lately
      given his sister Anastasia in marriage to Bassianus, a man of a
      considerable family and fortune, and had elevated his new kinsman
      to the rank of Cæsar. According to the system of government
      instituted by Diocletian, Italy, and perhaps Africa, were
      designed for his department in the empire. But the performance of
      the promised favor was either attended with so much delay, or
      accompanied with so many unequal conditions, that the fidelity of
      Bassianus was alienated rather than secured by the honorable
      distinction which he had obtained. His nomination had been
      ratified by the consent of Licinius; and that artful prince, by
      the means of his emissaries, soon contrived to enter into a
      secret and dangerous correspondence with the new Cæsar, to
      irritate his discontents, and to urge him to the rash enterprise
      of extorting by violence what he might in vain solicit from the
      justice of Constantine. But the vigilant emperor discovered the
      conspiracy before it was ripe for execution; and after solemnly
      renouncing the alliance of Bassianus, despoiled him of the
      purple, and inflicted the deserved punishment on his treason and
      ingratitude. The haughty refusal of Licinius, when he was
      required to deliver up the criminals who had taken refuge in his
      dominions, confirmed the suspicions already entertained of his
      perfidy; and the indignities offered at Æmona, on the frontiers
      of Italy, to the statues of Constantine, became the signal of
      discord between the two princes. 87


      86 (return) [ The curious reader, who consults the Valesian
      fragment, p. 713, will probably accuse me of giving a bold and
      licentious paraphrase; but if he considers it with attention, he
      will acknowledge that my interpretation is probable and
      consistent.]


      87 (return) [ The situation of Æmona, or, as it is now called,
      Laybach, in Carniola, (D’Anville, Geographie Ancienne, tom. i. p.
      187,) may suggest a conjecture. As it lay to the north-east of
      the Julian Alps, that important territory became a natural object
      of dispute between the sovereigns of Italy and of Illyricum.]


      The first battle was fought near Cibalis, a city of Pannonia,
      situated on the River Save, about fifty miles above Sirmium. 88
      From the inconsiderable forces which in this important contest
      two such powerful monarchs brought into the field, it may be
      inferred that the one was suddenly provoked, and that the other
      was unexpectedly surprised. The emperor of the West had only
      twenty thousand, and the sovereign of the East no more than five
      and thirty thousand, men. The inferiority of number was, however,
      compensated by the advantage of the ground. Constantine had taken
      post in a defile about half a mile in breadth, between a steep
      hill and a deep morass, and in that situation he steadily
      expected and repulsed the first attack of the enemy. He pursued
      his success, and advanced into the plain. But the veteran legions
      of Illyricum rallied under the standard of a leader who had been
      trained to arms in the school of Probus and Diocletian. The
      missile weapons on both sides were soon exhausted; the two
      armies, with equal valor, rushed to a closer engagement of swords
      and spears, and the doubtful contest had already lasted from the
      dawn of the day to a late hour of the evening, when the right
      wing, which Constantine led in person, made a vigorous and
      decisive charge. The judicious retreat of Licinius saved the
      remainder of his troops from a total defeat; but when he computed
      his loss, which amounted to more than twenty thousand men, he
      thought it unsafe to pass the night in the presence of an active
      and victorious enemy. Abandoning his camp and magazines, he
      marched away with secrecy and diligence at the head of the
      greatest part of his cavalry, and was soon removed beyond the
      danger of a pursuit. His diligence preserved his wife, his son,
      and his treasures, which he had deposited at Sirmium. Licinius
      passed through that city, and breaking down the bridge on the
      Save, hastened to collect a new army in Dacia and Thrace. In his
      flight he bestowed the precarious title of Cæsar on Valens, his
      general of the Illyrian frontier. 89


      88 (return) [ Cibalis or Cibalæ (whose name is still preserved in
      the obscure ruins of Swilei) was situated about fifty miles from
      Sirmium, the capital of Illyricum, and about one hundred from
      Taurunum, or Belgrade, and the conflux of the Danube and the
      Save. The Roman garrisons and cities on those rivers are finely
      illustrated by M. d’Anville in a memoir inserted in l’Academie
      des Inscriptions, tom. xxviii.]


      89 (return) [ Zosimus (l. ii. p. 90, 91) gives a very particular
      account of this battle; but the descriptions of Zosimus are
      rhetorical rather than military]


      Chapter XIV: Six Emperors At The Same Time, Reunion Of The
      Empire.—Part IV.


      The plain of Mardia in Thrace was the theatre of a second battle
      no less obstinate and bloody than the former. The troops on both
      sides displayed the same valor and discipline; and the victory
      was once more decided by the superior abilities of Constantine,
      who directed a body of five thousand men to gain an advantageous
      height, from whence, during the heat of the action, they attacked
      the rear of the enemy, and made a very considerable slaughter.
      The troops of Licinius, however, presenting a double front, still
      maintained their ground, till the approach of night put an end to
      the combat, and secured their retreat towards the mountains of
      Macedonia. 90 The loss of two battles, and of his bravest
      veterans, reduced the fierce spirit of Licinius to sue for peace.
      His ambassador Mistrianus was admitted to the audience of
      Constantine: he expatiated on the common topics of moderation and
      humanity, which are so familiar to the eloquence of the
      vanquished; represented in the most insinuating language, that
      the event of the war was still doubtful, whilst its inevitable
      calamities were alike pernicious to both the contending parties;
      and declared that he was authorized to propose a lasting and
      honorable peace in the name of the _two_ emperors his masters.
      Constantine received the mention of Valens with indignation and
      contempt. “It was not for such a purpose,” he sternly replied,
      “that we have advanced from the shores of the western ocean in an
      uninterrupted course of combats and victories, that, after
      rejecting an ungrateful kinsman, we should accept for our
      colleague a contemptible slave. The abdication of Valens is the
      first article of the treaty.” 91 It was necessary to accept this
      humiliating condition; and the unhappy Valens, after a reign of a
      few days, was deprived of the purple and of his life. As soon as
      this obstacle was removed, the tranquillity of the Roman world
      was easily restored. The successive defeats of Licinius had
      ruined his forces, but they had displayed his courage and
      abilities. His situation was almost desperate, but the efforts of
      despair are sometimes formidable, and the good sense of
      Constantine preferred a great and certain advantage to a third
      trial of the chance of arms. He consented to leave his rival, or,
      as he again styled Licinius, his friend and brother, in the
      possession of Thrace, Asia Minor, Syria, and Egypt; but the
      provinces of Pannonia, Dalmatia, Dacia, Macedonia, and Greece,
      were yielded to the Western empire, and the dominions of
      Constantine now extended from the confines of Caledonia to the
      extremity of Peloponnesus. It was stipulated by the same treaty,
      that three royal youths, the sons of emperors, should be called
      to the hopes of the succession. Crispus and the young Constantine
      were soon afterwards declared Cæsars in the West, while the
      younger Licinius was invested with the same dignity in the East.
      In this double proportion of honors, the conqueror asserted the
      superiority of his arms and power. 92


      90 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 92, 93. Anonym. Valesian. p.
      713. The Epitomes furnish some circumstances; but they frequently
      confound the two wars between Licinius and Constantine.]


      91 (return) [ Petrus Patricius in Excerpt. Legat. p. 27. If it
      should be thought that signifies more properly a son-in-law, we
      might conjecture that Constantine, assuming the name as well as
      the duties of a father, had adopted his younger brothers and
      sisters, the children of Theodora. But in the best authors
      sometimes signifies a husband, sometimes a father-in-law, and
      sometimes a kinsman in general. See Spanheim, Observat. ad
      Julian. Orat. i. p. 72.]


      92 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 93. Anonym. Valesian. p. 713.
      Eutropius, x. v. Aurelius Victor, Euseb. in Chron. Sozomen, l. i.
      c. 2. Four of these writers affirm that the promotion of the
      Cæsars was an article of the treaty. It is, however, certain,
      that the younger Constantine and Licinius were not yet born; and
      it is highly probable that the promotion was made the 1st of
      March, A. D. 317. The treaty had probably stipulated that the two
      Cæsars might be created by the western, and one only by the
      eastern emperor; but each of them reserved to himself the choice
      of the persons.]


      The reconciliation of Constantine and Licinius, though it was
      imbittered by resentment and jealousy, by the remembrance of
      recent injuries, and by the apprehension of future dangers,
      maintained, however, above eight years, the tranquility of the
      Roman world. As a very regular series of the Imperial laws
      commences about this period, it would not be difficult to
      transcribe the civil regulations which employed the leisure of
      Constantine. But the most important of his institutions are
      intimately connected with the new system of policy and religion,
      which was not perfectly established till the last and peaceful
      years of his reign. There are many of his laws, which, as far as
      they concern the rights and property of individuals, and the
      practice of the bar, are more properly referred to the private
      than to the public jurisprudence of the empire; and he published
      many edicts of so local and temporary a nature, that they would
      ill deserve the notice of a general history. Two laws, however,
      may be selected from the crowd; the one for its importance, the
      other for its singularity; the former for its remarkable
      benevolence, the latter for its excessive severity. 1. The horrid
      practice, so familiar to the ancients, of exposing or murdering
      their new-born infants, was become every day more frequent in the
      provinces, and especially in Italy. It was the effect of
      distress; and the distress was principally occasioned by the
      intolerant burden of taxes, and by the vexatious as well as cruel
      prosecutions of the officers of the revenue against their
      insolvent debtors. The less opulent or less industrious part of
      mankind, instead of rejoicing in an increase of family, deemed it
      an act of paternal tenderness to release their children from the
      impending miseries of a life which they themselves were unable to
      support. The humanity of Constantine, moved, perhaps, by some
      recent and extraordinary instances of despair, engaged him to
      address an edict to all the cities of Italy, and afterwards of
      Africa, directing immediate and sufficient relief to be given to
      those parents who should produce before the magistrates the
      children whom their own poverty would not allow them to educate.
      But the promise was too liberal, and the provision too vague, to
      effect any general or permanent benefit. 93 The law, though it
      may merit some praise, served rather to display than to alleviate
      the public distress. It still remains an authentic monument to
      contradict and confound those venal orators, who were too well
      satisfied with their own situation to discover either vice or
      misery under the government of a generous sovereign. 94 2. The
      laws of Constantine against rapes were dictated with very little
      indulgence for the most amiable weaknesses of human nature; since
      the description of that crime was applied not only to the brutal
      violence which compelled, but even to the gentle seduction which
      might persuade, an unmarried woman, under the age of twenty-five,
      to leave the house of her parents. “The successful ravisher was
      punished with death;” and as if simple death was inadequate to
      the enormity of his guilt, he was either burnt alive, or torn in
      pieces by wild beasts in the amphitheatre. The virgin’s
      declaration, that she had been carried away with her own consent,
      instead of saving her lover, exposed her to share his fate. The
      duty of a public prosecution was intrusted to the parents of the
      guilty or unfortunate maid; and if the sentiments of nature
      prevailed on them to dissemble the injury, and to repair by a
      subsequent marriage the honor of their family, they were
      themselves punished by exile and confiscation. The slaves,
      whether male or female, who were convicted of having been
      accessory to rape or seduction, were burnt alive, or put to death
      by the ingenious torture of pouring down their throats a quantity
      of melted lead. As the crime was of a public kind, the accusation
      was permitted even to strangers.9401


      9401 (return) [ This explanation appears to me little probable.
      Godefroy has made a much more happy conjecture, supported by all
      the historical circumstances which relate to this edict. It was
      published the 12th of May, A. D. 315. at Naissus in Pannonia, the
      birthplace of Constantine. The 8th of October, in that year,
      Constantine gained the victory of Cibalis over Licinius. He was
      yet uncertain as to the fate of the war: the Christians, no
      doubt, whom he favored, had prophesied his victory. Lactantius,
      then preceptor of Crispus, had just written his work upon
      Christianity, (his Divine Institutes;) he had dedicated it to
      Constantine. In this book he had inveighed with great force
      against infanticide, and the exposure of infants, (l. vi. c. 20.)
      Is it not probable that Constantine had read this work, that he
      had conversed on the subject with Lactantius, that he was moved,
      among other things, by the passage to which I have referred, and
      in the first transport of his enthusiasm, he published the edict
      in question? The whole of the edict bears the character of
      precipitation, of excitement, (entrainement,) rather than of
      deliberate reflection—the extent of the promises, the
      indefiniteness of the means, of the conditions, and of the time
      during which the parents might have a right to the succor of the
      state. Is there not reason to believe that the humanity of
      Constantine was excited by the influence of Lactantius, by that
      of the principles of Christianity, and of the Christians
      themselves, already in high esteem with the emperor, rather than
      by some “extraordinary instances of despair”? * * * See
      Hegewisch, Essai Hist. sur les Finances Romaines. The edict for
      Africa was not published till 322: of that we may say in truth
      that its origin was in the misery of the times. Africa had
      suffered much from the cruelty of Maxentius. Constantine says
      expressly, that he had learned that parents, under the pressure
      of distress, were there selling their children. This decree is
      more distinct, more maturely deliberated than the former; the
      succor which was to be given to the parents, and the source from
      which it was to be derived, are determined. (Code Theod. l. xi.
      tit. 27, c 2.) If the direct utility of these laws may not have
      been very extensive, they had at least the great and happy effect
      of establishing a decisive opposition between the principles of
      the government and those which, at this time, had prevailed among
      the subjects of the empire.—G.]


      The commencement of the action was not limited to any term of
      years, and the consequences of the sentence were extended to the
      innocent offspring of such an irregular union. 95 But whenever
      the offence inspires less horror than the punishment, the rigor
      of penal law is obliged to give way to the common feelings of
      mankind. The most odious parts of this edict were softened or
      repealed in the subsequent reigns; 96 and even Constantine
      himself very frequently alleviated, by partial acts of mercy, the
      stern temper of his general institutions. Such, indeed, was the
      singular humor of that emperor, who showed himself as indulgent,
      and even remiss, in the execution of his laws, as he was severe,
      and even cruel, in the enacting of them. It is scarcely possible
      to observe a more decisive symptom of weakness, either in the
      character of the prince, or in the constitution of the
      government. 97


      93 (return) [ Codex Theodosian. l. xi. tit. 27, tom. iv. p. 188,
      with Godefroy’s observations. See likewise l. v. tit. 7, 8.]


      94 (return) [ Omnia foris placita, domi prospera, annonæ
      ubertate, fructuum copia, &c. Panegyr. Vet. x. 38. This oration
      of Nazarius was pronounced on the day of the Quinquennalia of the
      Cæsars, the 1st of March, A. D. 321.]


      95 (return) [ See the edict of Constantine, addressed to the
      Roman people, in the Theodosian Code, l. ix. tit. 24, tom. iii.
      p. 189.]


      96 (return) [ His son very fairly assigns the true reason of the
      repeal: “Na sub specie atrocioris judicii aliqua in ulciscendo
      crimine dilatio næ ceretur.” Cod. Theod. tom. iii. p. 193]


      97 (return) [ Eusebius (in Vita Constant. l. iii. c. 1) chooses
      to affirm, that in the reign of this hero, the sword of justice
      hung idle in the hands of the magistrates. Eusebius himself, (l.
      iv. c. 29, 54,) and the Theodosian Code, will inform us that this
      excessive lenity was not owing to the want either of atrocious
      criminals or of penal laws.]


      The civil administration was sometimes interrupted by the
      military defence of the empire. Crispus, a youth of the most
      amiable character, who had received with the title of Cæsar the
      command of the Rhine, distinguished his conduct, as well as
      valor, in several victories over the Franks and Alemanni, and
      taught the barbarians of that frontier to dread the eldest son of
      Constantine, and the grandson of Constantius. 98 The emperor
      himself had assumed the more difficult and important province of
      the Danube. The Goths, who in the time of Claudius and Aurelian
      had felt the weight of the Roman arms, respected the power of the
      empire, even in the midst of its intestine divisions. But the
      strength of that warlike nation was now restored by a peace of
      near fifty years; a new generation had arisen, who no longer
      remembered the misfortunes of ancient days; the Sarmatians of the
      Lake Mæotis followed the Gothic standard either as subjects or as
      allies, and their united force was poured upon the countries of
      Illyricum. Campona, Margus, and Benonia, 982 appear to have been
      the scenes of several memorable sieges and battles; 99 and though
      Constantine encountered a very obstinate resistance, he prevailed
      at length in the contest, and the Goths were compelled to
      purchased an ignominious retreat, by restoring the booty and
      prisoners which they had taken. Nor was this advantage sufficient
      to satisfy the indignation of the emperor. He resolved to
      chastise as well as to repulse the insolent barbarians who had
      dared to invade the territories of Rome. At the head of his
      legions he passed the Danube, after repairing the bridge which
      had been constructed by Trajan, penetrated into the strongest
      recesses of Dacia, 100 and when he had inflicted a severe
      revenge, condescended to give peace to the suppliant Goths, on
      condition that, as often as they were required, they should
      supply his armies with a body of forty thousand soldiers. 101
      Exploits like these were no doubt honorable to Constantine, and
      beneficial to the state; but it may surely be questioned, whether
      they can justify the exaggerated assertion of Eusebius, that ALL
      SCYTHIA, as far as the extremity of the North, divided as it was
      into so many names and nations of the most various and savage
      manners, had been added by his victorious arms to the Roman
      empire. 102


      98 (return) [ Nazarius in Panegyr. Vet. x. The victory of Crispus
      over the Alemanni is expressed on some medals. * Note: Other
      medals are extant, the legends of which commemorate the success
      of Constantine over the Sarmatians and other barbarous nations,
      Sarmatia Devicta. Victoria Gothica. Debellatori Gentium
      Barbarorum. Exuperator Omnium Gentium. St. Martin, note on Le
      Beau, i. 148.—M.]


      982 (return) [ Campona, Old Buda in Hungary; Margus, Benonia,
      Widdin, in Mæsia—G and M.]


      99 (return) [ See Zosimus, l. ii. p. 93, 94; though the narrative
      of that historian is neither clear nor consistent. The Panegyric
      of Optatianus (c. 23) mentions the alliance of the Sarmatians
      with the Carpi and Getæ, and points out the several fields of
      battle. It is supposed that the Sarmatian games, celebrated in
      the month of November, derived their origin from the success of
      this war.]


      100 (return) [ In the Cæsars of Julian, (p. 329. Commentaire de
      Spanheim, p. 252.) Constantine boasts, that he had recovered the
      province (Dacia) which Trajan had subdued. But it is insinuated
      by Silenus, that the conquests of Constantine were like the
      gardens of Adonis, which fade and wither almost the moment they
      appear.]


      101 (return) [ Jornandes de Rebus Geticis, c. 21. I know not
      whether we may entirely depend on his authority. Such an alliance
      has a very recent air, and scarcely is suited to the maxims of
      the beginning of the fourth century.]


      102 (return) [ Eusebius in Vit. Constantin. l. i. c. 8. This
      passage, however, is taken from a general declamation on the
      greatness of Constantine, and not from any particular account of
      the Gothic war.]


      In this exalted state of glory, it was impossible that
      Constantine should any longer endure a partner in the empire.
      Confiding in the superiority of his genius and military power, he
      determined, without any previous injury, to exert them for the
      destruction of Licinius, whose advanced age and unpopular vices
      seemed to offer a very easy conquest. 103 But the old emperor,
      awakened by the approaching danger, deceived the expectations of
      his friends, as well as of his enemies. Calling forth that spirit
      and those abilities by which he had deserved the friendship of
      Galerius and the Imperial purple, he prepared himself for the
      contest, collected the forces of the East, and soon filled the
      plains of Hadrianople with his troops, and the straits of the
      Hellespont with his fleet. The army consisted of one hundred and
      fifty thousand foot, and fifteen thousand horse; and as the
      cavalry was drawn, for the most part, from Phrygia and
      Cappadocia, we may conceive a more favorable opinion of the
      beauty of the horses, than of the courage and dexterity of their
      riders. The fleet was composed of three hundred and fifty galleys
      of three ranks of oars. A hundred and thirty of these were
      furnished by Egypt and the adjacent coast of Africa. A hundred
      and ten sailed from the ports of Phœnicia and the isle of Cyprus;
      and the maritime countries of Bithynia, Ionia, and Caria were
      likewise obliged to provide a hundred and ten galleys. The troops
      of Constantine were ordered to a rendezvous at Thessalonica; they
      amounted to above a hundred and twenty thousand horse and foot.
      104 Their emperor was satisfied with their martial appearance,
      and his army contained more soldiers, though fewer men, than that
      of his eastern competitor. The legions of Constantine were levied
      in the warlike provinces of Europe; action had confirmed their
      discipline, victory had elevated their hopes, and there were
      among them a great number of veterans, who, after seventeen
      glorious campaigns under the same leader, prepared themselves to
      deserve an honorable dismission by a last effort of their valor.
      105 But the naval preparations of Constantine were in every
      respect much inferior to those of Licinius. The maritime cities
      of Greece sent their respective quotas of men and ships to the
      celebrated harbor of Piræus, and their united forces consisted of
      no more than two hundred small vessels—a very feeble armament, if
      it is compared with those formidable fleets which were equipped
      and maintained by the republic of Athens during the Peloponnesian
      war. 106 Since Italy was no longer the seat of government, the
      naval establishments of Misenum and Ravenna had been gradually
      neglected; and as the shipping and mariners of the empire were
      supported by commerce rather than by war, it was natural that
      they should the most abound in the industrious provinces of Egypt
      and Asia. It is only surprising that the eastern emperor, who
      possessed so great a superiority at sea, should have neglected
      the opportunity of carrying an offensive war into the centre of
      his rival’s dominions.


      103 (return) [ Constantinus tamen, vir ingens, et omnia efficere
      nitens quæ animo præparasset, simul principatum totius urbis
      affectans, Licinio bellum intulit. Eutropius, x. 5. Zosimus, l.
      ii. p 89. The reasons which they have assigned for the first
      civil war, may, with more propriety, be applied to the second.]


      104 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 94, 95.]


      105 (return) [ Constantine was very attentive to the privileges
      and comforts of his fellow-veterans, (Conveterani,) as he now
      began to style them. See the Theodosian Code, l. vii. tit. 10,
      tom. ii. p. 419, 429.]


      106 (return) [ Whilst the Athenians maintained the empire of the
      sea, their fleet consisted of three, and afterwards of four,
      hundred galleys of three ranks of oars, all completely equipped
      and ready for immediate service. The arsenal in the port of
      Piræus had cost the republic a thousand talents, about two
      hundred and sixteen thousand pounds. See Thucydides de Bel.
      Pelopon. l. ii. c. 13, and Meursius de Fortuna Attica, c. 19.]


      Instead of embracing such an active resolution, which might have
      changed the whole face of the war, the prudent Licinius expected
      the approach of his rival in a camp near Hadrianople, which he
      had fortified with an anxious care that betrayed his apprehension
      of the event. Constantine directed his march from Thessalonica
      towards that part of Thrace, till he found himself stopped by the
      broad and rapid stream of the Hebrus, and discovered the numerous
      army of Licinius, which filled the steep ascent of the hill, from
      the river to the city of Hadrianople. Many days were spent in
      doubtful and distant skirmishes; but at length the obstacles of
      the passage and of the attack were removed by the intrepid
      conduct of Constantine. In this place we might relate a wonderful
      exploit of Constantine, which, though it can scarcely be
      paralleled either in poetry or romance, is celebrated, not by a
      venal orator devoted to his fortune, but by an historian, the
      partial enemy of his fame. We are assured that the valiant
      emperor threw himself into the River Hebrus, accompanied only by
      _twelve_ horsemen, and that by the effort or terror of his
      invincible arm, he broke, slaughtered, and put to flight a host
      of a hundred and fifty thousand men. The credulity of Zosimus
      prevailed so strongly over his passion, that among the events of
      the memorable battle of Hadrianople, he seems to have selected
      and embellished, not the most important, but the most marvellous.
      The valor and danger of Constantine are attested by a slight
      wound which he received in the thigh; but it may be discovered
      even from an imperfect narration, and perhaps a corrupted text,
      that the victory was obtained no less by the conduct of the
      general than by the courage of the hero; that a body of five
      thousand archers marched round to occupy a thick wood in the rear
      of the enemy, whose attention was diverted by the construction of
      a bridge, and that Licinius, perplexed by so many artful
      evolutions, was reluctantly drawn from his advantageous post to
      combat on equal ground on the plain. The contest was no longer
      equal. His confused multitude of new levies was easily vanquished
      by the experienced veterans of the West. Thirty-four thousand men
      are reported to have been slain. The fortified camp of Licinius
      was taken by assault the evening of the battle; the greater part
      of the fugitives, who had retired to the mountains, surrendered
      themselves the next day to the discretion of the conqueror; and
      his rival, who could no longer keep the field, confined himself
      within the walls of Byzantium. 107


      107 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 95, 96. This great battle is
      described in the Valesian fragment, (p. 714,) in a clear though
      concise manner. “Licinius vero circum Hadrianopolin maximo
      exercitu latera ardui montis impleverat; illuc toto agmine
      Constantinus inflexit. Cum bellum terra marique traheretur,
      quamvis per arduum suis nitentibus, attamen disciplina militari
      et felicitate, Constantinus Licinu confusum et sine ordine
      agentem vicit exercitum; leviter femore sau ciatus.”]


      The siege of Byzantium, which was immediately undertaken by
      Constantine, was attended with great labor and uncertainty. In
      the late civil wars, the fortifications of that place, so justly
      considered as the key of Europe and Asia, had been repaired and
      strengthened; and as long as Licinius remained master of the sea,
      the garrison was much less exposed to the danger of famine than
      the army of the besiegers. The naval commanders of Constantine
      were summoned to his camp, and received his positive orders to
      force the passage of the Hellespont, as the fleet of Licinius,
      instead of seeking and destroying their feeble enemy, continued
      inactive in those narrow straits, where its superiority of
      numbers was of little use or advantage. Crispus, the emperor’s
      eldest son, was intrusted with the execution of this daring
      enterprise, which he performed with so much courage and success,
      that he deserved the esteem, and most probably excited the
      jealousy, of his father. The engagement lasted two days; and in
      the evening of the first, the contending fleets, after a
      considerable and mutual loss, retired into their respective
      harbors of Europe and Asia. The second day, about noon, a strong
      south wind 108 sprang up, which carried the vessels of Crispus
      against the enemy; and as the casual advantage was improved by
      his skilful intrepidity, he soon obtained a complete victory. A
      hundred and thirty vessels were destroyed, five thousand men were
      slain, and Amandus, the admiral of the Asiatic fleet, escaped
      with the utmost difficulty to the shores of Chalcedon. As soon as
      the Hellespont was open, a plentiful convoy of provisions flowed
      into the camp of Constantine, who had already advanced the
      operations of the siege. He constructed artificial mounds of
      earth of an equal height with the ramparts of Byzantium. The
      lofty towers which were erected on that foundation galled the
      besieged with large stones and darts from the military engines,
      and the battering rams had shaken the walls in several places. If
      Licinius persisted much longer in the defence, he exposed himself
      to be involved in the ruin of the place. Before he was
      surrounded, he prudently removed his person and treasures to
      Chalcedon in Asia; and as he was always desirous of associating
      companions to the hopes and dangers of his fortune, he now
      bestowed the title of Cæsar on Martinianus, who exercised one of
      the most important offices of the empire. 109


      108 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 97, 98. The current always sets
      out of the Hellespont; and when it is assisted by a north wind,
      no vessel can attempt the passage. A south wind renders the force
      of the current almost imperceptible. See Tournefort’s Voyage au
      Levant, Let. xi.]


      109 (return) [ Aurelius Victor. Zosimus, l. ii. p. 93. According
      to the latter, Martinianus was Magister Officiorum, (he uses the
      Latin appellation in Greek.) Some medals seem to intimate, that
      during his short reign he received the title of Augustus.]


      Such were still the resources, and such the abilities, of
      Licinius, that, after so many successive defeats, he collected in
      Bithynia a new army of fifty or sixty thousand men, while the
      activity of Constantine was employed in the siege of Byzantium.
      The vigilant emperor did not, however, neglect the last struggles
      of his antagonist. A considerable part of his victorious army was
      transported over the Bosphorus in small vessels, and the decisive
      engagement was fought soon after their landing on the heights of
      Chrysopolis, or, as it is now called, of Scutari. The troops of
      Licinius, though they were lately raised, ill armed, and worse
      disciplined, made head against their conquerors with fruitless
      but desperate valor, till a total defeat, and a slaughter of five
      and twenty thousand men, irretrievably determined the fate of
      their leader. 110 He retired to Nicomedia, rather with the view
      of gaining some time for negotiation, than with the hope of any
      effectual defence. Constantia, his wife, and the sister of
      Constantine, interceded with her brother in favor of her husband,
      and obtained from his policy, rather than from his compassion, a
      solemn promise, confirmed by an oath, that after the sacrifice of
      Martinianus, and the resignation of the purple, Licinius himself
      should be permitted to pass the remainder of this life in peace
      and affluence. The behavior of Constantia, and her relation to
      the contending parties, naturally recalls the remembrance of that
      virtuous matron who was the sister of Augustus, and the wife of
      Antony. But the temper of mankind was altered, and it was no
      longer esteemed infamous for a Roman to survive his honor and
      independence. Licinius solicited and accepted the pardon of his
      offences, laid himself and his purple at the feet of his _lord_
      and _master_, was raised from the ground with insulting pity, was
      admitted the same day to the Imperial banquet, and soon
      afterwards was sent away to Thessalonica, which had been chosen
      for the place of his confinement. 111 His confinement was soon
      terminated by death, and it is doubtful whether a tumult of the
      soldiers, or a decree of the senate, was suggested as the motive
      for his execution. According to the rules of tyranny, he was
      accused of forming a conspiracy, and of holding a treasonable
      correspondence with the barbarians; but as he was never
      convicted, either by his own conduct or by any legal evidence, we
      may perhaps be allowed, from his weakness, to presume his
      innocence. 112 The memory of Licinius was branded with infamy,
      his statues were thrown down, and by a hasty edict, of such
      mischievous tendency that it was almost immediately corrected,
      all his laws, and all the judicial proceedings of his reign, were
      at once abolished. 113 By this victory of Constantine, the Roman
      world was again united under the authority of one emperor,
      thirty-seven years after Diocletian had divided his power and
      provinces with his associate Maximian.


      110 (return) [ Eusebius (in Vita Constantin. I. ii. c. 16, 17)
      ascribes this decisive victory to the pious prayers of the
      emperor. The Valesian fragment (p. 714) mentions a body of Gothic
      auxiliaries, under their chief Aliquaca, who adhered to the party
      of Licinius.]


      111 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 102. Victor Junior in Epitome.
      Anonym. Valesian. p. 714.]


      112 (return) [ Contra religionem sacramenti Thessalonicæ privatus
      occisus est. Eutropius, x. 6; and his evidence is confirmed by
      Jerome (in Chronic.) as well as by Zosimus, l. ii. p. 102. The
      Valesian writer is the only one who mentions the soldiers, and it
      is Zonaras alone who calls in the assistance of the senate.
      Eusebius prudently slides over this delicate transaction. But
      Sozomen, a century afterwards, ventures to assert the treasonable
      practices of Licinius.]


      113 (return) [ See the Theodosian Code, l. xv. tit. 15, tom. v. p
      404, 405. These edicts of Constantine betray a degree of passion
      and precipitation very unbecoming the character of a lawgiver.]


      The successive steps of the elevation of Constantine, from his
      first assuming the purple at York, to the resignation of
      Licinius, at Nicomedia, have been related with some minuteness
      and precision, not only as the events are in themselves both
      interesting and important, but still more, as they contributed to
      the decline of the empire by the expense of blood and treasure,
      and by the perpetual increase, as well of the taxes, as of the
      military establishment. The foundation of Constantinople, and the
      establishment of the Christian religion, were the immediate and
      memorable consequences of this revolution.


      Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.—Part I.


The Progress Of The Christian Religion, And The Sentiments, Manners,
Numbers, And Condition Of The Primitive Christians.101


      101 (return) [ In spite of my resolution, Lardner led me to look
      through the famous fifteenth and sixteenth chapters of Gibbon. I
      could not lay them down without finishing them. The causes
      assigned, in the fifteenth chapter, for the diffusion of
      Christianity, must, no doubt, have contributed to it materially;
      but I doubt whether he saw them all. Perhaps those which he
      enumerates are among the most obvious. They might all be safely
      adopted by a Christian writer, with some change in the language
      and manner. Mackintosh see Life, i. p. 244.—M.]


      A candid but rational inquiry into the progress and establishment
      of Christianity may be considered as a very essential part of the
      history of the Roman empire. While that great body was invaded by
      open violence, or undermined by slow decay, a pure and humble
      religion gently insinuated itself into the minds of men, grew up
      in silence and obscurity, derived new vigor from opposition, and
      finally erected the triumphant banner of the Cross on the ruins
      of the Capitol. Nor was the influence of Christianity confined to
      the period or to the limits of the Roman empire. After a
      revolution of thirteen or fourteen centuries, that religion is
      still professed by the nations of Europe, the most distinguished
      portion of human kind in arts and learning as well as in arms. By
      the industry and zeal of the Europeans, it has been widely
      diffused to the most distant shores of Asia and Africa; and by
      the means of their colonies has been firmly established from
      Canada to Chili, in a world unknown to the ancients.


      But this inquiry, however useful or entertaining, is attended
      with two peculiar difficulties. The scanty and suspicious
      materials of ecclesiastical history seldom enable us to dispel
      the dark cloud that hangs over the first age of the church. The
      great law of impartiality too often obliges us to reveal the
      imperfections of the uninspired teachers and believers of the
      gospel; and, to a careless observer, _their_ faults may seem to
      cast a shade on the faith which they professed. But the scandal
      of the pious Christian, and the fallacious triumph of the
      Infidel, should cease as soon as they recollect not only _by
      whom_, but likewise _to whom_, the Divine Revelation was given.
      The theologian may indulge the pleasing task of describing
      Religion as she descended from Heaven, arrayed in her native
      purity. A more melancholy duty is imposed on the historian. He
      must discover the inevitable mixture of error and corruption,
      which she contracted in a long residence upon earth, among a weak
      and degenerate race of beings. 102


      102 (return) [ The art of Gibbon, or at least the unfair
      impression produced by these two memorable chapters, consists in
      confounding together, in one undistinguishable mass, the origin
      and apostolic propagation of the Christian religion with its
      later progress. The main question, the divine origin of the
      religion, is dexterously eluded or speciously conceded; his plan
      enables him to commence his account, in most parts, below the
      apostolic times; and it is only by the strength of the dark
      coloring with which he has brought out the failings and the
      follies of succeeding ages, that a shadow of doubt and suspicion
      is thrown back on the primitive period of Christianity. Divest
      this whole passage of the latent sarcasm betrayed by the
      subsequent one of the whole disquisition, and it might commence a
      Christian history, written in the most Christian spirit of
      candor.—M.]


      Our curiosity is naturally prompted to inquire by what means the
      Christian faith obtained so remarkable a victory over the
      established religions of the earth. To this inquiry, an obvious
      but satisfactory answer may be returned; that it was owing to the
      convincing evidence of the doctrine itself, and to the ruling
      providence of its great Author. But as truth and reason seldom
      find so favorable a reception in the world, and as the wisdom of
      Providence frequently condescends to use the passions of the
      human heart, and the general circumstances of mankind, as
      instruments to execute its purpose, we may still be permitted,
      though with becoming submission, to ask, not indeed what were the
      first, but what were the secondary causes of the rapid growth of
      the Christian church. It will, perhaps, appear, that it was most
      effectually favored and assisted by the five following causes:


      I. The inflexible, and if we may use the expression, the
      intolerant zeal of the Christians, derived, it is true, from the
      Jewish religion, but purified from the narrow and unsocial
      spirit, which, instead of inviting, had deterred the Gentiles
      from embracing the law of Moses.1023


      II. The doctrine of a future life, improved by every additional
      circumstance which could give weight and efficacy to that
      important truth. III. The miraculous powers ascribed to the
      primitive church. IV. The pure and austere morals of the
      Christians.


      V. The union and discipline of the Christian republic, which
      gradually formed an independent and increasing state in the heart
      of the Roman empire.


      1023 (return) [Though we are thus far agreed with respect to the
      inflexibility and intolerance of Christian zeal, yet as to the
      principle from which it was derived, we are, toto cœlo, divided
      in opinion. You deduce it from the Jewish religion; I would refer
      it to a more adequate and a more obvious source, a full
      persuasion of the truth of Christianity. Watson. Letters Gibbon,
      i. 9.—M.]


      I. We have already described the religious harmony of the ancient
      world, and the facility with which the most different and even
      hostile nations embraced, or at least respected, each other’s
      superstitions. A single people refused to join in the common
      intercourse of mankind. The Jews, who, under the Assyrian and
      Persian monarchies, had languished for many ages the most
      despised portion of their slaves, 1 emerged from obscurity under
      the successors of Alexander; and as they multiplied to a
      surprising degree in the East, and afterwards in the West, they
      soon excited the curiosity and wonder of other nations. 2 The
      sullen obstinacy with which they maintained their peculiar rites
      and unsocial manners seemed to mark them out as a distinct
      species of men, who boldly professed, or who faintly disguised,
      their implacable habits to the rest of human kind. 3 Neither the
      violence of Antiochus, nor the arts of Herod, nor the example of
      the circumjacent nations, could ever persuade the Jews to
      associate with the institutions of Moses the elegant mythology of
      the Greeks. 4 According to the maxims of universal toleration,
      the Romans protected a superstition which they despised. 5 The
      polite Augustus condescended to give orders, that sacrifices
      should be offered for his prosperity in the temple of Jerusalem;
      6 whilst the meanest of the posterity of Abraham, who should have
      paid the same homage to the Jupiter of the Capitol, would have
      been an object of abhorrence to himself and to his brethren.


      But the moderation of the conquerors was insufficient to appease
      the jealous prejudices of their subjects, who were alarmed and
      scandalized at the ensigns of paganism, which necessarily
      introduced themselves into a Roman province. 7 The mad attempt of
      Caligula to place his own statue in the temple of Jerusalem was
      defeated by the unanimous resolution of a people who dreaded
      death much less than such an idolatrous profanation. 8 Their
      attachment to the law of Moses was equal to their detestation of
      foreign religions. The current of zeal and devotion, as it was
      contracted into a narrow channel, ran with the strength, and
      sometimes with the fury, of a torrent. This facility has not
      always prevented intolerance, which seems inherent in the
      religious spirit, when armed with authority. The separation of
      the ecclesiastical and civil power, appears to be the only means
      of at once maintaining religion and tolerance: but this is a very
      modern notion. The passions, which mingle themselves with
      opinions, made the Pagans very often intolerant and persecutors;
      witness the Persians, the Egyptians even the Greeks and Romans.


      1st. The Persians.—Cambyses, conqueror of the Egyptians,
      condemned to death the magistrates of Memphis, because they had
      offered divine honors to their god. Apis: he caused the god to be
      brought before him, struck him with his dagger, commanded the
      priests to be scourged, and ordered a general massacre of all the
      Egyptians who should be found celebrating the festival of the
      statues of the gods to be burnt. Not content with this
      intolerance, he sent an army to reduce the Ammonians to slavery,
      and to set on fire the temple in which Jupiter delivered his
      oracles. See Herod. iii. 25—29, 37. Xerxes, during his invasion
      of Greece, acted on the same principles: l c destroyed all the
      temples of Greece and Ionia, except that of Ephesus. See Paus. l.
      vii. p. 533, and x. p. 887.


      Strabo, l. xiv. b. 941. 2d. The Egyptians.—They thought
      themselves defiled when they had drunk from the same cup or eaten
      at the same table with a man of a different belief from their
      own. “He who has voluntarily killed any sacred animal is punished
      with death; but if any one, even involuntarily, has killed a cat
      or an ibis, he cannot escape the extreme penalty: the people drag
      him away, treat him in the most cruel manner, sometimes without
      waiting for a judicial sentence. * * * Even at the time when King
      Ptolemy was not yet the acknowledged friend of the Roman people,
      while the multitude were paying court with all possible attention
      to the strangers who came from Italy * * a Roman having killed a
      cat, the people rushed to his house, and neither the entreaties
      of the nobles, whom the king sent to them, nor the terror of the
      Roman name, were sufficiently powerful to rescue the man from
      punishment, though he had committed the crime involuntarily.”
      Diod. Sic. i 83. Juvenal, in his 13th Satire, describes the
      sanguinary conflict between the inhabitants of Ombos and of
      Tentyra, from religious animosity. The fury was carried so far,
      that the conquerors tore and devoured the quivering limbs of the
      conquered.


      Ardet adhuc Ombos et Tentyra, summus utrinque Inde furor vulgo,
      quod numina vicinorum Odit uterque locus; quum solos credat
      habendos Esse Deos quos ipse colit. Sat. xv. v. 85.


      3d. The Greeks.—“Let us not here,” says the Abbé Guénée, “refer
      to the cities of Peloponnesus and their severity against atheism;
      the Ephesians prosecuting Heraclitus for impiety; the Greeks
      armed one against the other by religious zeal, in the
      Amphictyonic war. Let us say nothing either of the frightful
      cruelties inflicted by three successors of Alexander upon the
      Jews, to force them to abandon their religion, nor of Antiochus
      expelling the philosophers from his states. Let us not seek our
      proofs of intolerance so far off. Athens, the polite and learned
      Athens, will supply us with sufficient examples. Every citizen
      made a public and solemn vow to conform to the religion of his
      country, to defend it, and to cause it to be respected. An
      express law severely punished all discourses against the gods,
      and a rigid decree ordered the denunciation of all who should
      deny their existence. * * * The practice was in unison with the
      severity of the law. The proceedings commenced against
      Protagoras; a price set upon the head of Diagoras; the danger of
      Alcibiades; Aristotle obliged to fly; Stilpo banished; Anaxagoras
      hardly escaping death; Pericles himself, after all his services
      to his country, and all the glory he had acquired, compelled to
      appear before the tribunals and make his defence; * * a priestess
      executed for having introduced strange gods; Socrates condemned
      and drinking the hemlock, because he was accused of not
      recognizing those of his country, &c.; these facts attest too
      loudly, to be called in question, the religious intolerance of
      the most humane and enlightened people in Greece.” Lettres de
      quelques Juifs a Mons. Voltaire, i. p. 221. (Compare Bentley on
      Freethinking, from which much of this is derived.)—M.


      4th. The Romans.—The laws of Rome were not less express and
      severe. The intolerance of foreign religions reaches, with the
      Romans, as high as the laws of the twelve tables; the
      prohibitions were afterwards renewed at different times.
      Intolerance did not discontinue under the emperors; witness the
      counsel of Mæcenas to Augustus. This counsel is so remarkable,
      that I think it right to insert it entire. “Honor the gods
      yourself,” says Mæcenas to Augustus, “in every way according to
      the usage of your ancestors, and compel others to worship them.
      Hate and punish those who introduce strange gods, not only for
      the sake of the gods, (he who despises them will respect no one,)
      but because those who introduce new gods engage a multitude of
      persons in foreign laws and customs. From hence arise unions
      bound by oaths and confederacies, and associations, things
      dangerous to a monarchy.” Dion Cass. l. ii. c. 36. (But, though
      some may differ from it, see Gibbon’s just observation on this
      passage in Dion Cassius, ch. xvi. note 117; impugned, indeed, by
      M. Guizot, note in loc.)—M.


      Even the laws which the philosophers of Athens and of Rome wrote
      for their imaginary republics are intolerant. Plato does not
      leave to his citizens freedom of religious worship; and Cicero
      expressly prohibits them from having other gods than those of the
      state. Lettres de quelques Juifs a Mons. Voltaire, i. p. 226.—G.


      According to M. Guizot’s just remarks, religious intolerance will
      always ally itself with the passions of man, however different
      those passions may be. In the instances quoted above, with the
      Persians it was the pride of despotism; to conquer the gods of a
      country was the last mark of subjugation. With the Egyptians, it
      was the gross Fetichism of the superstitious populace, and the
      local jealousy of neighboring towns. In Greece, persecution was
      in general connected with political party; in Rome, with the
      stern supremacy of the law and the interests of the state. Gibbon
      has been mistaken in attributing to the tolerant spirit of
      Paganism that which arose out of the peculiar circumstances of
      the times. 1st. The decay of the old Polytheism, through the
      progress of reason and intelligence, and the prevalence of
      philosophical opinions among the higher orders.


      2d. The Roman character, in which the political always
      predominated over the religious party. The Romans were contented
      with having bowed the world to a uniformity of subjection to
      their power, and cared not for establishing the (to them) less
      important uniformity of religion.—M.


      1 (return) [ Dum Assyrios penes, Medosque, et Persas Oriens fuit,
      despectissima pars servientium. Tacit. Hist. v. 8. Herodotus, who
      visited Asia whilst it obeyed the last of those empires, slightly
      mentions the Syrians of Palestine, who, according to their own
      confession, had received from Egypt the rite of circumcision. See
      l. ii. c. 104.]


      2 (return) [ Diodorus Siculus, l. xl. Dion Cassius, l. xxxvii. p.
      121. Tacit Hist. v. 1—9. Justin xxxvi. 2, 3.]


      3 (return) [ Tradidit arcano quæcunque volumine Moses, Non
      monstrare vias cadem nisi sacra colenti, Quæsitum ad fontem solos
      deducere verpas. The letter of this law is not to be found in the
      present volume of Moses. But the wise, the humane Maimonides
      openly teaches that if an idolater fall into the water, a Jew
      ought not to save him from instant death. See Basnage, Histoire
      des Juifs, l. vi. c. 28. * Note: It is diametrically opposed to
      its spirit and to its letter, see, among other passages, Deut. v.
      18. 19, (God) “loveth the stranger in giving him food and
      raiment. Love ye, therefore, the stranger: for ye were strangers
      in the land of Egypt.” Comp. Lev. xxiii. 25. Juvenal is a
      satirist, whose strong expressions can hardly be received as
      historic evidence; and he wrote after the horrible cruelties of
      the Romans, which, during and after the war, might give some
      cause for the complete isolation of the Jew from the rest of the
      world. The Jew was a bigot, but his religion was not the only
      source of his bigotry. After how many centuries of mutual wrong
      and hatred, which had still further estranged the Jew from
      mankind, did Maimonides write?—M.]


      4 (return) [ A Jewish sect, which indulged themselves in a sort
      of occasional conformity, derived from Herod, by whose example
      and authority they had been seduced, the name of Herodians. But
      their numbers were so inconsiderable, and their duration so
      short, that Josephus has not thought them worthy of his notice.
      See Prideaux’s Connection, vol. ii. p. 285. * Note: The Herodians
      were probably more of a political party than a religious sect,
      though Gibbon is most likely right as to their occasional
      conformity. See Hist. of the Jews, ii. 108.—M.]


      5 (return) [ Cicero pro Flacco, c. 28. * Note: The edicts of
      Julius Cæsar, and of some of the cities in Asia Minor (Krebs.
      Decret. pro Judæis,) in favor of the nation in general, or of the
      Asiatic Jews, speak a different language.—M.]


      6 (return) [ Philo de Legatione. Augustus left a foundation for a
      perpetual sacrifice. Yet he approved of the neglect which his
      grandson Caius expressed towards the temple of Jerusalem. See
      Sueton. in August. c. 93, and Casaubon’s notes on that passage.]


      7 (return) [ See, in particular, Joseph. Antiquitat. xvii. 6,
      xviii. 3; and de Bell. Judiac. i. 33, and ii. 9, edit. Havercamp.
      * Note: This was during the government of Pontius Pilate. (Hist.
      of Jews, ii. 156.) Probably in part to avoid this collision, the
      Roman governor, in general, resided at Cæsarea.—M.]


      8 (return) [ Jussi a Caio Cæsare, effigiem ejus in templo locare,
      arma potius sumpsere. Tacit. Hist. v. 9. Philo and Josephus gave
      a very circumstantial, but a very rhetorical, account of this
      transaction, which exceedingly perplexed the governor of Syria.
      At the first mention of this idolatrous proposal, King Agrippa
      fainted away; and did not recover his senses until the third day.
      (Hist. of Jews, ii. 181, &c.)]


      This inflexible perseverance, which appeared so odious or so
      ridiculous to the ancient world, assumes a more awful character,
      since Providence has deigned to reveal to us the mysterious
      history of the chosen people. But the devout and even scrupulous
      attachment to the Mosaic religion, so conspicuous among the Jews
      who lived under the second temple, becomes still more surprising,
      if it is compared with the stubborn incredulity of their
      forefathers. When the law was given in thunder from Mount Sinai,
      when the tides of the ocean and the course of the planets were
      suspended for the convenience of the Israelites, and when
      temporal rewards and punishments were the immediate consequences
      of their piety or disobedience, they perpetually relapsed into
      rebellion against the visible majesty of their Divine King,
      placed the idols of the nations in the sanctuary of Jehovah, and
      imitated every fantastic ceremony that was practised in the tents
      of the Arabs, or in the cities of Phœnicia. 9 As the protection
      of Heaven was deservedly withdrawn from the ungrateful race,
      their faith acquired a proportionable degree of vigor and purity.


      The contemporaries of Moses and Joshua had beheld with careless
      indifference the most amazing miracles. Under the pressure of
      every calamity, the belief of those miracles has preserved the
      Jews of a later period from the universal contagion of idolatry;
      and in contradiction to every known principle of the human mind,
      that singular people seems to have yielded a stronger and more
      ready assent to the traditions of their remote ancestors, than to
      the evidence of their own senses. 10


      9 (return) [ For the enumeration of the Syrian and Arabian
      deities, it may be observed, that Milton has comprised in one
      hundred and thirty very beautiful lines the two large and learned
      syntagmas which Selden had composed on that abstruse subject.]


      10 (return) [ “How long will this people provoke me? and how long
      will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs which I have
      shown among them?” (Numbers xiv. 11.) It would be easy, but it
      would be unbecoming, to justify the complaint of the Deity from
      the whole tenor of the Mosaic history. Note: Among a rude and
      barbarous people, religious impressions are easily made, and are
      as soon effaced. The ignorance which multiplies imaginary
      wonders, would weaken and destroy the effect of real miracle. At
      the period of the Jewish history, referred to in the passage from
      Numbers, their fears predominated over their faith,—the fears of
      an unwarlike people, just rescued from debasing slavery, and
      commanded to attack a fierce, a well-armed, a gigantic, and a far
      more numerous race, the inhabitants of Canaan. As to the frequent
      apostasy of the Jews, their religion was beyond their state of
      civilization. Nor is it uncommon for a people to cling with
      passionate attachment to that of which, at first, they could not
      appreciate the value. Patriotism and national pride will contend,
      even to death, for political rights which have been forced upon a
      reluctant people. The Christian may at least retort, with
      justice, that the great sign of his religion, the resurrection of
      Jesus, was most ardently believed, and most resolutely asserted,
      by the eye witnesses of the fact.—M.]


      The Jewish religion was admirably fitted for defence, but it was
      never designed for conquest; and it seems probable that the
      number of proselytes was never much superior to that of
      apostates. The divine promises were originally made, and the
      distinguishing rite of circumcision was enjoined, to a single
      family. When the posterity of Abraham had multiplied like the
      sands of the sea, the Deity, from whose mouth they received a
      system of laws and ceremonies, declared himself the proper and as
      it were the national God of Israel; and with the most jealous
      care separated his favorite people from the rest of mankind. The
      conquest of the land of Canaan was accompanied with so many
      wonderful and with so many bloody circumstances, that the
      victorious Jews were left in a state of irreconcilable hostility
      with all their neighbors. They had been commanded to extirpate
      some of the most idolatrous tribes, and the execution of the
      divine will had seldom been retarded by the weakness of humanity.


      With the other nations they were forbidden to contract any
      marriages or alliances; and the prohibition of receiving them
      into the congregation, which in some cases was perpetual, almost
      always extended to the third, to the seventh, or even to the
      tenth generation. The obligation of preaching to the Gentiles the
      faith of Moses had never been inculcated as a precept of the law,
      nor were the Jews inclined to impose it on themselves as a
      voluntary duty.


      In the admission of new citizens that unsocial people was
      actuated by the selfish vanity of the Greeks, rather than by the
      generous policy of Rome. The descendants of Abraham were
      flattered by the opinion that they alone were the heirs of the
      covenant, and they were apprehensive of diminishing the value of
      their inheritance by sharing it too easily with the strangers of
      the earth. A larger acquaintance with mankind extended their
      knowledge without correcting their prejudices; and whenever the
      God of Israel acquired any new votaries, he was much more
      indebted to the inconstant humor of polytheism than to the active
      zeal of his own missionaries. 11 The religion of Moses seems to
      be instituted for a particular country as well as for a single
      nation; and if a strict obedience had been paid to the order,
      that every male, three times in the year, should present himself
      before the Lord Jehovah, it would have been impossible that the
      Jews could ever have spread themselves beyond the narrow limits
      of the promised land. 12 That obstacle was indeed removed by the
      destruction of the temple of Jerusalem; but the most considerable
      part of the Jewish religion was involved in its destruction; and
      the Pagans, who had long wondered at the strange report of an
      empty sanctuary, 13 were at a loss to discover what could be the
      object, or what could be the instruments, of a worship which was
      destitute of temples and of altars, of priests and of sacrifices.


      Yet even in their fallen state, the Jews, still asserting their
      lofty and exclusive privileges, shunned, instead of courting, the
      society of strangers. They still insisted with inflexible rigor
      on those parts of the law which it was in their power to
      practise. Their peculiar distinctions of days, of meats, and a
      variety of trivial though burdensome observances, were so many
      objects of disgust and aversion for the other nations, to whose
      habits and prejudices they were diametrically opposite. The
      painful and even dangerous rite of circumcision was alone capable
      of repelling a willing proselyte from the door of the synagogue.
      14


      11 (return) [ All that relates to the Jewish proselytes has been
      very ably by Basnage, Hist. des Juifs, l. vi. c. 6, 7.]


      12 (return) [ See Exod. xxiv. 23, Deut. xvi. 16, the
      commentators, and a very sensible note in the Universal History,
      vol. i. p. 603, edit. fol.]


      13 (return) [ When Pompey, using or abusing the right of
      conquest, entered into the Holy of Holies, it was observed with
      amazement, “Nulli intus Deum effigie, vacuam sedem et inania
      arcana.” Tacit. Hist. v. 9. It was a popular saying, with regard
      to the Jews, “Nil præter nubes et coeli numen adorant.”]


      14 (return) [ A second kind of circumcision was inflicted on a
      Samaritan or Egyptian proselyte. The sullen indifference of the
      Talmudists, with respect to the conversion of strangers, may be
      seen in Basnage Histoire des Juifs, l. xi. c. 6.]


      Under these circumstances, Christianity offered itself to the
      world, armed with the strength of the Mosaic law, and delivered
      from the weight of its fetters. An exclusive zeal for the truth
      of religion, and the unity of God, was as carefully inculcated in
      the new as in the ancient system; and whatever was now revealed
      to mankind concerning the nature and designs of the Supreme Being
      was fitted to increase their reverence for that mysterious
      doctrine. The divine authority of Moses and the prophets was
      admitted, and even established, as the firmest basis of
      Christianity. From the beginning of the world, an uninterrupted
      series of predictions had announced and prepared the
      long-expected coming of the Messiah, who, in compliance with the
      gross apprehensions of the Jews, had been more frequently
      represented under the character of a King and Conqueror, than
      under that of a Prophet, a Martyr, and the Son of God. By his
      expiatory sacrifice, the imperfect sacrifices of the temple were
      at once consummated and abolished. The ceremonial law, which
      consisted only of types and figures, was succeeded by a pure and
      spiritual worship equally adapted to all climates, as well as to
      every condition of mankind; and to the initiation of blood was
      substituted a more harmless initiation of water. The promise of
      divine favor, instead of being partially confined to the
      posterity of Abraham, was universally proposed to the freeman and
      the slave, to the Greek and to the barbarian, to the Jew and to
      the Gentile. Every privilege that could raise the proselyte from
      earth to heaven, that could exalt his devotion, secure his
      happiness, or even gratify that secret pride which, under the
      semblance of devotion, insinuates itself into the human heart,
      was still reserved for the members of the Christian church; but
      at the same time all mankind was permitted, and even solicited,
      to accept the glorious distinction, which was not only proffered
      as a favor, but imposed as an obligation. It became the most
      sacred duty of a new convert to diffuse among his friends and
      relations the inestimable blessing which he had received, and to
      warn them against a refusal that would be severely punished as a
      criminal disobedience to the will of a benevolent but
      all-powerful Deity.


      Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.—Part II.


      The enfranchisement of the church from the bonds of the synagogue
      was a work, however, of some time and of some difficulty. The
      Jewish converts, who acknowledged Jesus in the character of the
      Messiah foretold by their ancient oracles, respected him as a
      prophetic teacher of virtue and religion; but they obstinately
      adhered to the ceremonies of their ancestors, and were desirous
      of imposing them on the Gentiles, who continually augmented the
      number of believers. These Judaizing Christians seem to have
      argued with some degree of plausibility from the divine origin of
      the Mosaic law, and from the immutable perfections of its great
      Author. They affirmed, that if the Being, who is the same through
      all eternity, had designed to abolish those sacred rites which
      had served to distinguish his chosen people, the repeal of them
      would have been no less clear and solemn than their first
      promulgation: _that_, instead of those frequent declarations,
      which either suppose or assert the perpetuity of the Mosaic
      religion, it would have been represented as a provisionary scheme
      intended to last only to the coming of the Messiah, who should
      instruct mankind in a more perfect mode of faith and of worship:
      15 _that_ the Messiah himself, and his disciples who conversed
      with him on earth, instead of authorizing by their example the
      most minute observances of the Mosaic law, 16 would have
      published to the world the abolition of those useless and
      obsolete ceremonies, without suffering Christianity to remain
      during so many years obscurely confounded among the sects of the
      Jewish church. Arguments like these appear to have been used in
      the defence of the expiring cause of the Mosaic law; but the
      industry of our learned divines has abundantly explained the
      ambiguous language of the Old Testament, and the ambiguous
      conduct of the apostolic teachers. It was proper gradually to
      unfold the system of the gospel, and to pronounce, with the
      utmost caution and tenderness, a sentence of condemnation so
      repugnant to the inclination and prejudices of the believing
      Jews.


      15 (return) [ These arguments were urged with great ingenuity by
      the Jew Orobio, and refuted with equal ingenuity and candor by
      the Christian Limborch. See the Amica Collatio, (it well deserves
      that name,) or account of the dispute between them.]


      16 (return) [ Jesus... circumcisus erat; cibis utebatur Judaicis;
      vestitu simili; purgatos scabie mittebat ad sacerdotes; Paschata
      et alios dies festos religiose observabat: Si quos sanavit
      sabbatho, ostendit non tantum ex lege, sed et exceptis
      sententiis, talia opera sabbatho non interdicta. Grotius de
      Veritate Religionis Christianæ, l. v. c. 7. A little afterwards,
      (c. 12,) he expatiates on the condescension of the apostles.]


      The history of the church of Jerusalem affords a lively proof of
      the necessity of those precautions, and of the deep impression
      which the Jewish religion had made on the minds of its sectaries.
      The first fifteen bishops of Jerusalem were all circumcised Jews;
      and the congregation over which they presided united the law of
      Moses with the doctrine of Christ. 17 It was natural that the
      primitive tradition of a church which was founded only forty days
      after the death of Christ, and was governed almost as many years
      under the immediate inspection of his apostle, should be received
      as the standard of orthodoxy. The distant churches very
      frequently appealed to the authority of their venerable Parent,
      and relieved her distresses by a liberal contribution of alms.
      But when numerous and opulent societies were established in the
      great cities of the empire, in Antioch, Alexandria, Ephesus,
      Corinth, and Rome, the reverence which Jerusalem had inspired to
      all the Christian colonies insensibly diminished. 18b The Jewish
      converts, or, as they were afterwards called, the Nazarenes, who
      had laid the foundations of the church, soon found themselves
      overwhelmed by the increasing multitudes, that from all the
      various religions of polytheism enlisted under the banner of
      Christ: and the Gentiles, who, with the approbation of their
      peculiar apostle, had rejected the intolerable weight of the
      Mosaic ceremonies, at length refused to their more scrupulous
      brethren the same toleration which at first they had humbly
      solicited for their own practice. The ruin of the temple of the
      city, and of the public religion of the Jews, was severely felt
      by the Nazarenes; as in their manners, though not in their faith,
      they maintained so intimate a connection with their impious
      countrymen, whose misfortunes were attributed by the Pagans to
      the contempt, and more justly ascribed by the Christians to the
      wrath, of the Supreme Deity. The Nazarenes retired from the ruins
      of Jerusalem 18 to the little town of Pella beyond the Jordan,
      where that ancient church languished above sixty years in
      solitude and obscurity. 19 They still enjoyed the comfort of
      making frequent and devout visits to the _Holy City_, and the
      hope of being one day restored to those seats which both nature
      and religion taught them to love as well as to revere. But at
      length, under the reign of Hadrian, the desperate fanaticism of
      the Jews filled up the measure of their calamities; and the
      Romans, exasperated by their repeated rebellions, exercised the
      rights of victory with unusual rigor. The emperor founded, under
      the name of Ælia Capitolina, a new city on Mount Sion, 20 to
      which he gave the privileges of a colony; and denouncing the
      severest penalties against any of the Jewish people who should
      dare to approach its precincts, he fixed a vigilant garrison of a
      Roman cohort to enforce the execution of his orders. The
      Nazarenes had only one way left to escape the common
      proscription, and the force of truth was on this occasion
      assisted by the influence of temporal advantages. They elected
      Marcus for their bishop, a prelate of the race of the Gentiles,
      and most probably a native either of Italy or of some of the
      Latin provinces. At his persuasion, the most considerable part of
      the congregation renounced the Mosaic law, in the practice of
      which they had persevered above a century. By this sacrifice of
      their habits and prejudices, they purchased a free admission into
      the colony of Hadrian, and more firmly cemented their union with
      the Catholic church. 21


      17 (return) [ Pæne omnes Christum Deum sub legis observatione
      credebant Sulpicius Severus, ii. 31. See Eusebius, Hist.
      Ecclesiast. l. iv. c. 5.]


      18b (return) [Footnote 18b: Mosheim de Rebus Christianis ante
      Constantinum Magnum, page 153. In this masterly performance,
      which I shall often have occasion to quote he enters much more
      fully into the state of the primitive church than he has an
      opportunity of doing in his General History.]


      18 (return) [ This is incorrect: all the traditions concur in
      placing the abandonment of the city by the Christians, not only
      before it was in ruins, but before the seige had commenced.
      Euseb. loc. cit., and Le Clerc.—M.]


      19 (return) [ Eusebius, l. iii. c. 5. Le Clerc, Hist. Ecclesiast.
      p. 605. During this occasional absence, the bishop and church of
      Pella still retained the title of Jerusalem. In the same manner,
      the Roman pontiffs resided seventy years at Avignon; and the
      patriarchs of Alexandria have long since transferred their
      episcopal seat to Cairo.]


      20 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxix. The exile of the Jewish
      nation from Jerusalem is attested by Aristo of Pella, (apud
      Euseb. l. iv. c. 6,) and is mentioned by several ecclesiastical
      writers; though some of them too hastily extend this interdiction
      to the whole country of Palestine.]


      21 (return) [ Eusebius, l. iv. c. 6. Sulpicius Severus, ii. 31.
      By comparing their unsatisfactory accounts, Mosheim (p. 327, &c.)
      has drawn out a very distinct representation of the circumstances
      and motives of this revolution.]


      When the name and honors of the church of Jerusalem had been
      restored to Mount Sion, the crimes of heresy and schism were
      imputed to the obscure remnant of the Nazarenes, which refused to
      accompany their Latin bishop. They still preserved their former
      habitation of Pella, spread themselves into the villages adjacent
      to Damascus, and formed an inconsiderable church in the city of
      Berœa, or, as it is now called, of Aleppo, in Syria. 22 The name
      of Nazarenes was deemed too honorable for those Christian Jews,
      and they soon received, from the supposed poverty of their
      understanding, as well as of their condition, the contemptuous
      epithet of Ebionites. 23 In a few years after the return of the
      church of Jerusalem, it became a matter of doubt and controversy,
      whether a man who sincerely acknowledged Jesus as the Messiah,
      but who still continued to observe the law of Moses, could
      possibly hope for salvation. The humane temper of Justin Martyr
      inclined him to answer this question in the affirmative; and
      though he expressed himself with the most guarded diffidence, he
      ventured to determine in favor of such an imperfect Christian, if
      he were content to practise the Mosaic ceremonies, without
      pretending to assert their general use or necessity. But when
      Justin was pressed to declare the sentiment of the church, he
      confessed that there were very many among the orthodox
      Christians, who not only excluded their Judaizing brethren from
      the hope of salvation, but who declined any intercourse with them
      in the common offices of friendship, hospitality, and social
      life. 24 The more rigorous opinion prevailed, as it was natural
      to expect, over the milder; and an eternal bar of separation was
      fixed between the disciples of Moses and those of Christ. The
      unfortunate Ebionites, rejected from one religion as apostates,
      and from the other as heretics, found themselves compelled to
      assume a more decided character; and although some traces of that
      obsolete sect may be discovered as late as the fourth century,
      they insensibly melted away, either into the church or the
      synagogue. 25


      22 (return) [ Le Clerc (Hist. Ecclesiast. p. 477, 535) seems to
      have collected from Eusebius, Jerome, Epiphanius, and other
      writers, all the principal circumstances that relate to the
      Nazarenes or Ebionites. The nature of their opinions soon divided
      them into a stricter and a milder sect; and there is some reason
      to conjecture, that the family of Jesus Christ remained members,
      at least, of the latter and more moderate party.]


      23 (return) [ Some writers have been pleased to create an Ebion,
      the imaginary author of their sect and name. But we can more
      safely rely on the learned Eusebius than on the vehement
      Tertullian, or the credulous Epiphanius. According to Le Clerc,
      the Hebrew word Ebjonim may be translated into Latin by that of
      Pauperes. See Hist. Ecclesiast. p. 477. * Note: The opinion of Le
      Clerc is generally admitted; but Neander has suggested some good
      reasons for supposing that this term only applied to poverty of
      condition. The obscure history of their tenets and divisions, is
      clearly and rationally traced in his History of the Church, vol.
      i. part ii. p. 612, &c., Germ. edit.—M.]


      24 (return) [ See the very curious Dialogue of Justin Martyr with
      the Jew Tryphon. The conference between them was held at Ephesus,
      in the reign of Antoninus Pius, and about twenty years after the
      return of the church of Pella to Jerusalem. For this date consult
      the accurate note of Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom.
      ii. p. 511. * Note: Justin Martyr makes an important distinction,
      which Gibbon has neglected to notice. * * * There were some who
      were not content with observing the Mosaic law themselves, but
      enforced the same observance, as necessary to salvation, upon the
      heathen converts, and refused all social intercourse with them if
      they did not conform to the law. Justin Martyr himself freely
      admits those who kept the law themselves to Christian communion,
      though he acknowledges that some, not the Church, thought
      otherwise; of the other party, he himself thought less favorably.
      The former by some are considered the Nazarenes the atter the
      Ebionites—G and M.]


      25 (return) [ Of all the systems of Christianity, that of
      Abyssinia is the only one which still adheres to the Mosaic
      rites. (Geddes’s Church History of Æthiopia, and Dissertations de
      La Grand sur la Relation du P. Lobo.) The eunuch of the queen
      Candace might suggest some suspicious; but as we are assured
      (Socrates, i. 19. Sozomen, ii. 24. Ludolphus, p. 281) that the
      Æthiopians were not converted till the fourth century, it is more
      reasonable to believe that they respected the sabbath, and
      distinguished the forbidden meats, in imitation of the Jews, who,
      in a very early period, were seated on both sides of the Red Sea.
      Circumcision had been practised by the most ancient Æthiopians,
      from motives of health and cleanliness, which seem to be
      explained in the Recherches Philosophiques sur les Americains,
      tom. ii. p. 117.]


      While the orthodox church preserved a just medium between
      excessive veneration and improper contempt for the law of Moses,
      the various heretics deviated into equal but opposite extremes of
      error and extravagance. From the acknowledged truth of the Jewish
      religion, the Ebionites had concluded that it could never be
      abolished. From its supposed imperfections, the Gnostics as
      hastily inferred that it never was instituted by the wisdom of
      the Deity. There are some objections against the authority of
      Moses and the prophets, which too readily present themselves to
      the sceptical mind; though they can only be derived from our
      ignorance of remote antiquity, and from our incapacity to form an
      adequate judgment of the divine economy. These objections were
      eagerly embraced and as petulantly urged by the vain science of
      the Gnostics. 26 As those heretics were, for the most part,
      averse to the pleasures of sense, they morosely arraigned the
      polygamy of the patriarchs, the gallantries of David, and the
      seraglio of Solomon. The conquest of the land of Canaan, and the
      extirpation of the unsuspecting natives, they were at a loss how
      to reconcile with the common notions of humanity and justice. 261
      But when they recollected the sanguinary list of murders, of
      executions, and of massacres, which stain almost every page of
      the Jewish annals, they acknowledged that the barbarians of
      Palestine had exercised as much compassion towards their
      idolatrous enemies, as they had ever shown to their friends or
      countrymen. 27 Passing from the sectaries of the law to the law
      itself, they asserted that it was impossible that a religion
      which consisted only of bloody sacrifices and trifling
      ceremonies, and whose rewards as well as punishments were all of
      a carnal and temporal nature, could inspire the love of virtue,
      or restrain the impetuosity of passion. The Mosaic account of the
      creation and fall of man was treated with profane derision by the
      Gnostics, who would not listen with patience to the repose of the
      Deity after six days’ labor, to the rib of Adam, the garden of
      Eden, the trees of life and of knowledge, the speaking serpent,
      the forbidden fruit, and the condemnation pronounced against
      human kind for the venial offence of their first progenitors. 28
      The God of Israel was impiously represented by the Gnostics as a
      being liable to passion and to error, capricious in his favor,
      implacable in his resentment, meanly jealous of his superstitious
      worship, and confining his partial providence to a single people,
      and to this transitory life. In such a character they could
      discover none of the features of the wise and omnipotent Father
      of the universe. 29 They allowed that the religion of the Jews
      was somewhat less criminal than the idolatry of the Gentiles; but
      it was their fundamental doctrine that the Christ whom they
      adored as the first and brightest emanation of the Deity appeared
      upon earth to rescue mankind from their various errors, and to
      reveal a new system of truth and perfection. The most learned of
      the fathers, by a very singular condescension, have imprudently
      admitted the sophistry of the Gnostics. 291 Acknowledging that
      the literal sense is repugnant to every principle of faith as
      well as reason, they deem themselves secure and invulnerable
      behind the ample veil of allegory, which they carefully spread
      over every tender part of the Mosaic dispensation. 30


      26 (return) [ Beausobre, Histoire du Manicheisme, l. i. c. 3, has
      stated their objections, particularly those of Faustus, the
      adversary of Augustin, with the most learned impartiality.]


      261 (return) [ On the “war law” of the Jews, see Hist. of Jews,
      i. 137.—M.]


      27 (return) [ Apud ipsos fides obstinata, misericordia in
      promptu: adversus amnes alios hostile odium. Tacit. Hist. v. 4.
      Surely Tacitus had seen the Jews with too favorable an eye. The
      perusal of Josephus must have destroyed the antithesis. * Note:
      Few writers have suspected Tacitus of partiality towards the
      Jews. The whole later history of the Jews illustrates as well
      their strong feelings of humanity to their brethren, as their
      hostility to the rest of mankind. The character and the position
      of Josephus with the Roman authorities, must be kept in mind
      during the perusal of his History. Perhaps he has not exaggerated
      the ferocity and fanaticism of the Jews at that time; but
      insurrectionary warfare is not the best school for the humaner
      virtues, and much must be allowed for the grinding tyranny of the
      later Roman governors. See Hist. of Jews, ii. 254.—M.]


      28 (return) [ Dr. Burnet (Archæologia, l. ii. c. 7) has discussed
      the first chapters of Genesis with too much wit and freedom. *
      Note: Dr. Burnet apologized for the levity with which he had
      conducted some of his arguments, by the excuse that he wrote in a
      learned language for scholars alone, not for the vulgar. Whatever
      may be thought of his success in tracing an Eastern allegory in
      the first chapters of Genesis, his other works prove him to have
      been a man of great genius, and of sincere piety.—M]


      29 (return) [ The milder Gnostics considered Jehovah, the
      Creator, as a Being of a mixed nature between God and the Dæmon.
      Others confounded him with an evil principle. Consult the second
      century of the general history of Mosheim, which gives a very
      distinct, though concise, account of their strange opinions on
      this subject.]


      291 (return) [ The Gnostics, and the historian who has stated
      these plausible objections with so much force as almost to make
      them his own, would have shown a more considerate and not less
      reasonable philosophy, if they had considered the religion of
      Moses with reference to the age in which it was promulgated; if
      they had done justice to its sublime as well as its more
      imperfect views of the divine nature; the humane and civilizing
      provisions of the Hebrew law, as well as those adapted for an
      infant and barbarous people. See Hist of Jews, i. 36, 37, &c.—M.]


      30 (return) [ See Beausobre, Hist. du Manicheisme, l. i. c. 4.
      Origen and St. Augustin were among the allegorists.]


      It has been remarked with more ingenuity than truth, that the
      virgin purity of the church was never violated by schism or
      heresy before the reign of Trajan or Hadrian, about one hundred
      years after the death of Christ. 31 We may observe with much more
      propriety, that, during that period, the disciples of the Messiah
      were indulged in a freer latitude, both of faith and practice,
      than has ever been allowed in succeeding ages. As the terms of
      communion were insensibly narrowed, and the spiritual authority
      of the prevailing party was exercised with increasing severity,
      many of its most respectable adherents, who were called upon to
      renounce, were provoked to assert their private opinions, to
      pursue the consequences of their mistaken principles, and openly
      to erect the standard of rebellion against the unity of the
      church. The Gnostics were distinguished as the most polite, the
      most learned, and the most wealthy of the Christian name; and
      that general appellation, which expressed a superiority of
      knowledge, was either assumed by their own pride, or ironically
      bestowed by the envy of their adversaries. They were almost
      without exception of the race of the Gentiles, and their
      principal founders seem to have been natives of Syria or Egypt,
      where the warmth of the climate disposes both the mind and the
      body to indolent and contemplative devotion. The Gnostics blended
      with the faith of Christ many sublime but obscure tenets, which
      they derived from oriental philosophy, and even from the religion
      of Zoroaster, concerning the eternity of matter, the existence of
      two principles, and the mysterious hierarchy of the invisible
      world. 32 As soon as they launched out into that vast abyss, they
      delivered themselves to the guidance of a disordered imagination;
      and as the paths of error are various and infinite, the Gnostics
      were imperceptibly divided into more than fifty particular sects,
      33 of whom the most celebrated appear to have been the
      Basilidians, the Valentinians, the Marcionites, and, in a still
      later period, the Manichæans. Each of these sects could boast of
      its bishops and congregations, of its doctors and martyrs; 34
      and, instead of the Four Gospels adopted by the church, 341 the
      heretics produced a multitude of histories, in which the actions
      and discourses of Christ and of his apostles were adapted to
      their respective tenets. 35 The success of the Gnostics was rapid
      and extensive. 36 They covered Asia and Egypt, established
      themselves in Rome, and sometimes penetrated into the provinces
      of the West. For the most part they arose in the second century,
      flourished during the third, and were suppressed in the fourth or
      fifth, by the prevalence of more fashionable controversies, and
      by the superior ascendant of the reigning power. Though they
      constantly disturbed the peace, and frequently disgraced the
      name, of religion, they contributed to assist rather than to
      retard the progress of Christianity. The Gentile converts, whose
      strongest objections and prejudices were directed against the law
      of Moses, could find admission into many Christian societies,
      which required not from their untutored mind any belief of an
      antecedent revelation. Their faith was insensibly fortified and
      enlarged, and the church was ultimately benefited by the
      conquests of its most inveterate enemies. 37


      31 (return) [ Hegesippus, ap. Euseb. l. iii. 32, iv. 22. Clemens
      Alexandrin Stromat. vii. 17. * Note: The assertion of Hegesippus
      is not so positive: it is sufficient to read the whole passage in
      Eusebius, to see that the former part is modified by the matter.
      Hegesippus adds, that up to this period the church had remained
      pure and immaculate as a virgin. Those who labored to corrupt the
      doctrines of the gospel worked as yet in obscurity—G]


      32 (return) [ In the account of the Gnostics of the second and
      third centuries, Mosheim is ingenious and candid; Le Clerc dull,
      but exact; Beausobre almost always an apologist; and it is much
      to be feared that the primitive fathers are very frequently
      calumniators. * Note The Histoire du Gnosticisme of M. Matter is
      at once the fairest and most complete account of these sects.—M.]


      33 (return) [ See the catalogues of Irenæus and Epiphanius. It
      must indeed be allowed, that those writers were inclined to
      multiply the number of sects which opposed the unity of the
      church.]


      34 (return) [ Eusebius, l. iv. c. 15. Sozomen, l. ii. c. 32. See
      in Bayle, in the article of Marcion, a curious detail of a
      dispute on that subject. It should seem that some of the Gnostics
      (the Basilidians) declined, and even refused the honor of
      Martyrdom. Their reasons were singular and abstruse. See Mosheim,
      p. 539.]


      341 (return) [ M. Hahn has restored the Marcionite Gospel with
      great ingenuity. His work is reprinted in Thilo. Codex. Apoc.
      Nov. Test. vol. i.—M.]


      35 (return) [ See a very remarkable passage of Origen, (Proem. ad
      Lucam.) That indefatigable writer, who had consumed his life in
      the study of the Scriptures, relies for their authenticity on the
      inspired authority of the church. It was impossible that the
      Gnostics could receive our present Gospels, many parts of which
      (particularly in the resurrection of Christ) are directly, and as
      it might seem designedly, pointed against their favorite tenets.
      It is therefore somewhat singular that Ignatius (Epist. ad Smyrn.
      Patr. Apostol. tom. ii. p. 34) should choose to employ a vague
      and doubtful tradition, instead of quoting the certain testimony
      of the evangelists. Note: Bishop Pearson has attempted very
      happily to explain this singularity.’ The first Christians were
      acquainted with a number of sayings of Jesus Christ, which are
      not related in our Gospels, and indeed have never been written.
      Why might not St. Ignatius, who had lived with the apostles or
      their disciples, repeat in other words that which St. Luke has
      related, particularly at a time when, being in prison, he could
      have the Gospels at hand? Pearson, Vind Ign. pp. 2, 9 p. 396 in
      tom. ii. Patres Apost. ed. Coteler—G.]


      36 (return) [ Faciunt favos et vespæ; faciunt ecclesias et
      Marcionitæ, is the strong expression of Tertullian, which I am
      obliged to quote from memory. In the time of Epiphanius (advers.
      Hæreses, p. 302) the Marcionites were very numerous in Italy,
      Syria, Egypt, Arabia, and Persia.]


      37 (return) [ Augustin is a memorable instance of this gradual
      progress from reason to faith. He was, during several years,
      engaged in the Manichæar sect.]


      But whatever difference of opinion might subsist between the
      Orthodox, the Ebionites, and the Gnostics, concerning the
      divinity or the obligation of the Mosaic law, they were all
      equally animated by the same exclusive zeal, and by the same
      abhorrence for idolatry, which had distinguished the Jews from
      the other nations of the ancient world. The philosopher, who
      considered the system of polytheism as a composition of human
      fraud and error, could disguise a smile of contempt under the
      mask of devotion, without apprehending that either the mockery,
      or the compliance, would expose him to the resentment of any
      invisible, or, as he conceived them, imaginary powers. But the
      established religions of Paganism were seen by the primitive
      Christians in a much more odious and formidable light. It was the
      universal sentiment both of the church and of heretics, that the
      dæmons were the authors, the patrons, and the objects of
      idolatry. 38 Those rebellious spirits who had been degraded from
      the rank of angels, and cast down into the infernal pit, were
      still permitted to roam upon earth, to torment the bodies, and to
      seduce the minds, of sinful men. The dæmons soon discovered and
      abused the natural propensity of the human heart towards
      devotion, and artfully withdrawing the adoration of mankind from
      their Creator, they usurped the place and honors of the Supreme
      Deity. By the success of their malicious contrivances, they at
      once gratified their own vanity and revenge, and obtained the
      only comfort of which they were yet susceptible, the hope of
      involving the human species in the participation of their guilt
      and misery. It was confessed, or at least it was imagined, that
      they had distributed among themselves the most important
      characters of polytheism, one dæmon assuming the name and
      attributes of Jupiter, another of Æsculapius, a third of Venus,
      and a fourth perhaps of Apollo; 39 and that, by the advantage of
      their long experience and ærial nature, they were enabled to
      execute, with sufficient skill and dignity, the parts which they
      had undertaken. They lurked in the temples, instituted festivals
      and sacrifices, invented fables, pronounced oracles, and were
      frequently allowed to perform miracles. The Christians, who, by
      the interposition of evil spirits, could so readily explain every
      præternatural appearance, were disposed and even desirous to
      admit the most extravagant fictions of the Pagan mythology. But
      the belief of the Christian was accompanied with horror. The most
      trifling mark of respect to the national worship he considered as
      a direct homage yielded to the dæmon, and as an act of rebellion
      against the majesty of God.


      38 (return) [ The unanimous sentiment of the primitive church is
      very clearly explained by Justin Martyr, Apolog. Major, by
      Athenagoras, Legat. c. 22. &c., and by Lactantius, Institut.
      Divin. ii. 14—19.]


      39 (return) [ Tertullian (Apolog. c. 23) alleges the confession
      of the dæmons themselves as often as they were tormented by the
      Christian exorcists]


      Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.—Part III.


      In consequence of this opinion, it was the first but arduous duty
      of a Christian to preserve himself pure and undefiled by the
      practice of idolatry. The religion of the nations was not merely
      a speculative doctrine professed in the schools or preached in
      the temples. The innumerable deities and rites of polytheism were
      closely interwoven with every circumstance of business or
      pleasure, of public or of private life, and it seemed impossible
      to escape the observance of them, without, at the same time,
      renouncing the commerce of mankind, and all the offices and
      amusements of society. 40 The important transactions of peace and
      war were prepared or concluded by solemn sacrifices, in which the
      magistrate, the senator, and the soldier, were obliged to preside
      or to participate. 41 The public spectacles were an essential
      part of the cheerful devotion of the Pagans, and the gods were
      supposed to accept, as the most grateful offering, the games that
      the prince and people celebrated in honor of their peculiar
      festivals. 42 The Christians, who with pious horror avoided the
      abomination of the circus or the theatre, found himself
      encompassed with infernal snares in every convivial
      entertainment, as often as his friends, invoking the hospitable
      deities, poured out libations to each other’s happiness. 43 When
      the bride, struggling with well-affected reluctance, was forced
      in hymenæal pomp over the threshold of her new habitation, 44 or
      when the sad procession of the dead slowly moved towards the
      funeral pile, 45 the Christian, on these interesting occasions,
      was compelled to desert the persons who were the dearest to him,
      rather than contract the guilt inherent to those impious
      ceremonies. Every art and every trade that was in the least
      concerned in the framing or adorning of idols was polluted by the
      stain of idolatry; 46 a severe sentence, since it devoted to
      eternal misery the far greater part of the community, which is
      employed in the exercise of liberal or mechanic professions. If
      we cast our eyes over the numerous remains of antiquity, we shall
      perceive, that besides the immediate representations of the gods,
      and the holy instruments of their worship, the elegant forms and
      agreeable fictions consecrated by the imagination of the Greeks,
      were introduced as the richest ornaments of the houses, the
      dress, and the furniture of the Pagans. 47 Even the arts of music
      and painting, of eloquence and poetry, flowed from the same
      impure origin. In the style of the fathers, Apollo and the Muses
      were the organs of the infernal spirit; Homer and Virgil were the
      most eminent of his servants; and the beautiful mythology which
      pervades and animates the compositions of their genius, is
      destined to celebrate the glory of the dæmons. Even the common
      language of Greece and Rome abounded with familiar but impious
      expressions, which the imprudent Christian might too carelessly
      utter, or too patiently hear. 48


      40 (return) [ Tertullian has written a most severe treatise
      against idolatry, to caution his brethren against the hourly
      danger of incurring that guilt. Recogita sylvam, et quantæ
      latitant spinæ. De Corona Militis, c. 10.]


      41 (return) [ The Roman senate was always held in a temple or
      consecrated place. (Aulus Gellius, xiv. 7.) Before they entered
      on business, every senator dropped some wine and frankincense on
      the altar. Sueton. in August. c. 35.]


      42 (return) [ See Tertullian, De Spectaculis. This severe
      reformer shows no more indulgence to a tragedy of Euripides, than
      to a combat of gladiators. The dress of the actors particularly
      offends him. By the use of the lofty buskin, they impiously
      strive to add a cubit to their stature. c. 23.]


      43 (return) [ The ancient practice of concluding the
      entertainment with libations, may be found in every classic.
      Socrates and Seneca, in their last moments, made a noble
      application of this custom. Postquam stagnum, calidæ aquæ
      introiit, respergens proximos servorum, addita voce, libare se
      liquorem illum Jovi Liberatori. Tacit. Annal. xv. 64.]


      44 (return) [ See the elegant but idolatrous hymn of Catullus, on
      the nuptials of Manlius and Julia. O Hymen, Hymenæe Io! Quis huic
      Deo compararier ausit?]


      45 (return) [ The ancient funerals (in those of Misenus and
      Pallas) are no less accurately described by Virgil, than they are
      illustrated by his commentator Servius. The pile itself was an
      altar, the flames were fed with the blood of victims, and all the
      assistants were sprinkled with lustral water.]


      46 (return) [ Tertullian de Idololatria, c. 11. * Note: The
      exaggerated and declamatory opinions of Tertullian ought not to
      be taken as the general sentiment of the early Christians. Gibbon
      has too often allowed himself to consider the peculiar notions of
      certain Fathers of the Church as inherent in Christianity. This
      is not accurate.—G.]


      47 (return) [ See every part of Montfaucon’s Antiquities. Even
      the reverses of the Greek and Roman coins were frequently of an
      idolatrous nature. Here indeed the scruples of the Christian were
      suspended by a stronger passion. Note: All this scrupulous nicety
      is at variance with the decision of St. Paul about meat offered
      to idols, 1, Cor. x. 21— 32.—M.]


      48 (return) [ Tertullian de Idololatria, c. 20, 21, 22. If a
      Pagan friend (on the occasion perhaps of sneezing) used the
      familiar expression of “Jupiter bless you,” the Christian was
      obliged to protest against the divinity of Jupiter.]


      The dangerous temptations which on every side lurked in ambush to
      surprise the unguarded believer, assailed him with redoubled
      violence on the days of solemn festivals. So artfully were they
      framed and disposed throughout the year, that superstition always
      wore the appearance of pleasure, and often of virtue. Some of the
      most sacred festivals in the Roman ritual were destined to salute
      the new calends of January with vows of public and private
      felicity; to indulge the pious remembrance of the dead and
      living; to ascertain the inviolable bounds of property; to hail,
      on the return of spring, the genial powers of fecundity; to
      perpetuate the two memorable æras of Rome, the foundation of the
      city and that of the republic; and to restore, during the humane
      license of the Saturnalia, the primitive equality of mankind.
      Some idea may be conceived of the abhorrence of the Christians
      for such impious ceremonies, by the scrupulous delicacy which
      they displayed on a much less alarming occasion. On days of
      general festivity it was the custom of the ancients to adorn
      their doors with lamps and with branches of laurel, and to crown
      their heads with a garland of flowers. This innocent and elegant
      practice might perhaps have been tolerated as a mere civil
      institution. But it most unluckily happened that the doors were
      under the protection of the household gods, that the laurel was
      sacred to the lover of Daphne, and that garlands of flowers,
      though frequently worn as a symbol either of joy or mourning, had
      been dedicated in their first origin to the service of
      superstition. The trembling Christians, who were persuaded in
      this instance to comply with the fashion of their country, and
      the commands of the magistrate, labored under the most gloomy
      apprehensions, from the reproaches of his own conscience, the
      censures of the church, and the denunciations of divine
      vengeance. 49 50


      49 (return) [ Consult the most labored work of Ovid, his
      imperfect Fasti. He finished no more than the first six months of
      the year. The compilation of Macrobius is called the Saturnalia,
      but it is only a small part of the first book that bears any
      relation to the title.]


      50 (return) [ Tertullian has composed a defence, or rather
      panegyric, of the rash action of a Christian soldier, who, by
      throwing away his crown of laurel, had exposed himself and his
      brethren to the most imminent danger. By the mention of the
      emperors, (Severus and Caracalla,) it is evident, notwithstanding
      the wishes of M. de Tillemont, that Tertullian composed his
      treatise De Corona long before he was engaged in the errors of
      the Montanists. See Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. iii. p. 384.
      Note: The soldier did not tear off his crown to throw it down
      with contempt; he did not even throw it away; he held it in his
      hand, while others were it on their heads. Solus libero capite,
      ornamento in manu otioso.—G Note: Tertullian does not expressly
      name the two emperors, Severus and Caracalla: he speaks only of
      two emperors, and of a long peace which the church had enjoyed.
      It is generally agreed that Tertullian became a Montanist about
      the year 200: his work, de Corona Militis, appears to have been
      written, at the earliest about the year 202 before the
      persecution of Severus: it may be maintained, then, that it is
      subsequent to the Montanism of the author. See Mosheim, Diss. de
      Apol. Tertull. p. 53. Biblioth. Amsterd. tom. x. part ii. p. 292.
      Cave’s Hist. Lit. p. 92, 93.—G. ——The state of Tertullian’s
      opinions at the particular period is almost an idle question.
      “The fiery African” is not at any time to be considered a fair
      representative of Christianity.—M.]


      Such was the anxious diligence which was required to guard the
      chastity of the gospel from the infectious breath of idolatry.
      The superstitious observances of public or private rites were
      carelessly practised, from education and habit, by the followers
      of the established religion. But as often as they occurred, they
      afforded the Christians an opportunity of declaring and
      confirming their zealous opposition. By these frequent
      protestations their attachment to the faith was continually
      fortified; and in proportion to the increase of zeal, they
      combated with the more ardor and success in the holy war, which
      they had undertaken against the empire of the demons.


      II. The writings of Cicero 51 represent in the most lively colors
      the ignorance, the errors, and the uncertainty of the ancient
      philosophers with regard to the immortality of the soul. When
      they are desirous of arming their disciples against the fear of
      death, they inculcate, as an obvious though melancholy position,
      that the fatal stroke of our dissolution releases us from the
      calamities of life; and that those can no longer suffer, who no
      longer exist. Yet there were a few sages of Greece and Rome who
      had conceived a more exalted, and, in some respects, a juster
      idea of human nature, though it must be confessed, that in the
      sublime inquiry, their reason had been often guided by their
      imagination, and that their imagination had been prompted by
      their vanity. When they viewed with complacency the extent of
      their own mental powers, when they exercised the various
      faculties of memory, of fancy, and of judgment, in the most
      profound speculations, or the most important labors, and when
      they reflected on the desire of fame, which transported them into
      future ages, far beyond the bounds of death and of the grave,
      they were unwilling to confound themselves with the beasts of the
      field, or to suppose that a being, for whose dignity they
      entertained the most sincere admiration, could be limited to a
      spot of earth, and to a few years of duration. With this
      favorable prepossession they summoned to their aid the science,
      or rather the language, of Metaphysics. They soon discovered,
      that as none of the properties of matter will apply to the
      operations of the mind, the human soul must consequently be a
      substance distinct from the body, pure, simple, and spiritual,
      incapable of dissolution, and susceptible of a much higher degree
      of virtue and happiness after the release from its corporeal
      prison. From these specious and noble principles, the
      philosophers who trod in the footsteps of Plato deduced a very
      unjustifiable conclusion, since they asserted, not only the
      future immortality, but the past eternity, of the human soul,
      which they were too apt to consider as a portion of the infinite
      and self-existing spirit, which pervades and sustains the
      universe. 52 A doctrine thus removed beyond the senses and the
      experience of mankind might serve to amuse the leisure of a
      philosophic mind; or, in the silence of solitude, it might
      sometimes impart a ray of comfort to desponding virtue; but the
      faint impression which had been received in the schools was soon
      obliterated by the commerce and business of active life. We are
      sufficiently acquainted with the eminent persons who flourished
      in the age of Cicero and of the first Cæsars, with their actions,
      their characters, and their motives, to be assured that their
      conduct in this life was never regulated by any serious
      conviction of the rewards or punishments of a future state. At
      the bar and in the senate of Rome the ablest orators were not
      apprehensive of giving offence to their hearers by exposing that
      doctrine as an idle and extravagant opinion, which was rejected
      with contempt by every man of a liberal education and
      understanding. 53


      51 (return) [ In particular, the first book of the Tusculan
      Questions, and the treatise De Senectute, and the Somnium
      Scipionis, contain, in the most beautiful language, every thing
      that Grecian philosophy, on Roman good sense, could possibly
      suggest on this dark but important object.]


      52 (return) [ The preexistence of human souls, so far at least as
      that doctrine is compatible with religion, was adopted by many of
      the Greek and Latin fathers. See Beausobre, Hist. du Manicheisme,
      l. vi. c. 4.]


      53 (return) [ See Cicero pro Cluent. c. 61. Cæsar ap. Sallust. de
      Bell. Catilis n 50. Juvenal. Satir. ii. 149. ——Esse aliquid
      manes, et subterranea regna, —————Nec pueri credunt, nisi qui
      nondum æree lavantæ.]


      Since therefore the most sublime efforts of philosophy can extend
      no further than feebly to point out the desire, the hope, or, at
      most, the probability, of a future state, there is nothing,
      except a divine revelation, that can ascertain the existence and
      describe the condition, of the invisible country which is
      destined to receive the souls of men after their separation from
      the body. But we may perceive several defects inherent to the
      popular religions of Greece and Rome, which rendered them very
      unequal to so arduous a task. 1. The general system of their
      mythology was unsupported by any solid proofs; and the wisest
      among the Pagans had already disclaimed its usurped authority. 2.
      The description of the infernal regions had been abandoned to the
      fancy of painters and of poets, who peopled them with so many
      phantoms and monsters, who dispensed their rewards and
      punishments with so little equity, that a solemn truth, the most
      congenial to the human heart, was oppressed and disgraced by the
      absurd mixture of the wildest fictions. 54 3. The doctrine of a
      future state was scarcely considered among the devout polytheists
      of Greece and Rome as a fundamental article of faith. The
      providence of the gods, as it related to public communities
      rather than to private individuals, was principally displayed on
      the visible theatre of the present world. The petitions which
      were offered on the altars of Jupiter or Apollo expressed the
      anxiety of their worshippers for temporal happiness, and their
      ignorance or indifference concerning a future life. 55 The
      important truth of the immortality of the soul was inculcated
      with more diligence, as well as success, in India, in Assyria, in
      Egypt, and in Gaul; and since we cannot attribute such a
      difference to the superior knowledge of the barbarians, we must
      ascribe it to the influence of an established priesthood, which
      employed the motives of virtue as the instrument of ambition. 56


      54 (return) [ The xith book of the Odyssey gives a very dreary
      and incoherent account of the infernal shades. Pindar and Virgil
      have embellished the picture; but even those poets, though more
      correct than their great model, are guilty of very strange
      inconsistencies. See Bayle, Responses aux Questions d’un
      Provincial, part iii. c. 22.]


      55 (return) [ See xvith epistle of the first book of Horace, the
      xiiith Satire of Juvenal, and the iid Satire of Persius: these
      popular discourses express the sentiment and language of the
      multitude.]


      56 (return) [ If we confine ourselves to the Gauls, we may
      observe, that they intrusted, not only their lives, but even
      their money, to the security of another world. Vetus ille mos
      Gallorum occurrit (says Valerius Maximus, l. ii. c. 6, p. 10)
      quos, memoria proditum est pecunias montuas, quæ his apud inferos
      redderentur, dare solitos. The same custom is more darkly
      insinuated by Mela, l. iii. c. 2. It is almost needless to add,
      that the profits of trade hold a just proportion to the credit of
      the merchant, and that the Druids derived from their holy
      profession a character of responsibility, which could scarcely be
      claimed by any other order of men.]


      We might naturally expect that a principle so essential to
      religion, would have been revealed in the clearest terms to the
      chosen people of Palestine, and that it might safely have been
      intrusted to the hereditary priesthood of Aaron. It is incumbent
      on us to adore the mysterious dispensations of Providence, 57
      when we discover that the doctrine of the immortality of the soul
      is omitted in the law of Moses; it is darkly insinuated by the
      prophets; and during the long period which elapsed between the
      Egyptian and the Babylonian servitudes, the hopes as well as
      fears of the Jews appear to have been confined within the narrow
      compass of the present life. 58 After Cyrus had permitted the
      exiled nation to return into the promised land, and after Ezra
      had restored the ancient records of their religion, two
      celebrated sects, the Sadducees and the Pharisees, insensibly
      arose at Jerusalem. 59 The former, selected from the more opulent
      and distinguished ranks of society, were strictly attached to the
      literal sense of the Mosaic law, and they piously rejected the
      immortality of the soul, as an opinion that received no
      countenance from the divine book, which they revered as the only
      rule of their faith. To the authority of Scripture the Pharisees
      added that of tradition, and they accepted, under the name of
      traditions, several speculative tenets from the philosophy or
      religion of the eastern nations. The doctrines of fate or
      predestination, of angels and spirits, and of a future state of
      rewards and punishments, were in the number of these new articles
      of belief; and as the Pharisees, by the austerity of their
      manners, had drawn into their party the body of the Jewish
      people, the immortality of the soul became the prevailing
      sentiment of the synagogue, under the reign of the Asmonæan
      princes and pontiffs. The temper of the Jews was incapable of
      contenting itself with such a cold and languid assent as might
      satisfy the mind of a Polytheist; and as soon as they admitted
      the idea of a future state, they embraced it with the zeal which
      has always formed the characteristic of the nation. Their zeal,
      however, added nothing to its evidence, or even probability: and
      it was still necessary that the doctrine of life and immortality,
      which had been dictated by nature, approved by reason, and
      received by superstition, should obtain the sanction of divine
      truth from the authority and example of Christ.


      57 (return) [ The right reverend author of the Divine Legation of
      Moses as signs a very curious reason for the omission, and most
      ingeniously retorts it on the unbelievers. * Note: The hypothesis
      of Warburton concerning this remarkable fact, which, as far as
      the Law of Moses, is unquestionable, made few disciples; and it
      is difficult to suppose that it could be intended by the author
      himself for more than a display of intellectual strength. Modern
      writers have accounted in various ways for the silence of the
      Hebrew legislator on the immortality of the soul. According to
      Michaelis, “Moses wrote as an historian and as a lawgiver; he
      regulated the ecclesiastical discipline, rather than the
      religious belief of his people; and the sanctions of the law
      being temporal, he had no occasion, and as a civil legislator
      could not with propriety, threaten punishments in another world.”
      See Michaelis, Laws of Moses, art. 272, vol. iv. p. 209, Eng.
      Trans.; and Syntagma Commentationum, p. 80, quoted by Guizot. M.
      Guizot adds, the “ingenious conjecture of a philosophic
      theologian,” which approximates to an opinion long entertained by
      the Editor. That writer believes, that in the state of
      civilization at the time of the legislator, this doctrine, become
      popular among the Jews, would necessarily have given birth to a
      multitude of idolatrous superstitions which he wished to prevent.
      His primary object was to establish a firm theocracy, to make his
      people the conservators of the doctrine of the Divine Unity, the
      basis upon which Christianity was hereafter to rest. He carefully
      excluded everything which could obscure or weaken that doctrine.
      Other nations had strangely abused their notions on the
      immortality of the soul; Moses wished to prevent this abuse:
      hence he forbade the Jews from consulting necromancers, (those
      who evoke the spirits of the dead.) Deut. xviii. 11. Those who
      reflect on the state of the Pagans and the Jews, and on the
      facility with which idolatry crept in on every side, will not be
      astonished that Moses has not developed a doctrine of which the
      influence might be more pernicious than useful to his people.
      Orat. Fest. de Vitæ Immort. Spe., &c., auct. Ph. Alb. Stapfer, p.
      12 13, 20. Berne, 1787. ——Moses, as well from the intimations
      scattered in his writings, the passage relating to the
      translation of Enoch, (Gen. v. 24,) the prohibition of
      necromancy, (Michaelis believes him to be the author of the Book
      of Job though this opinion is in general rejected; other learned
      writers consider this Book to be coeval with and known to Moses,)
      as from his long residence in Egypt, and his acquaintance with
      Egyptian wisdom, could not be ignorant of the doctrine of the
      immortality of the soul. But this doctrine if popularly known
      among the Jews, must have been purely Egyptian, and as so,
      intimately connected with the whole religious system of that
      country. It was no doubt moulded up with the tenet of the
      transmigration of the soul, perhaps with notions analogous to the
      emanation system of India in which the human soul was an efflux
      from or indeed a part of, the Deity. The Mosaic religion drew a
      wide and impassable interval between the Creator and created
      human beings: in this it differed from the Egyptian and all the
      Eastern religions. As then the immortality of the soul was thus
      inseparably blended with those foreign religions which were
      altogether to be effaced from the minds of the people, and by no
      means necessary for the establishment of the theocracy, Moses
      maintained silence on this point and a purer notion of it was
      left to be developed at a more favorable period in the history of
      man.—M.]


      58 (return) [ See Le Clerc (Prolegomena ad Hist. Ecclesiast.
      sect. 1, c. 8) His authority seems to carry the greater weight,
      as he has written a learned and judicious commentary on the books
      of the Old Testament.]


      59 (return) [ Joseph. Antiquitat. l. xiii. c. 10. De Bell. Jud.
      ii. 8. According to the most natural interpretation of his words,
      the Sadducees admitted only the Pentateuch; but it has pleased
      some modern critics to add the Prophets to their creed, and to
      suppose that they contented themselves with rejecting the
      traditions of the Pharisees. Dr. Jortin has argued that point in
      his Remarks on Ecclesiastical History, vol. ii. p. 103.]


      When the promise of eternal happiness was proposed to mankind on
      condition of adopting the faith, and of observing the precepts,
      of the gospel, it is no wonder that so advantageous an offer
      should have been accepted by great numbers of every religion, of
      every rank, and of every province in the Roman empire. The
      ancient Christians were animated by a contempt for their present
      existence, and by a just confidence of immortality, of which the
      doubtful and imperfect faith of modern ages cannot give us any
      adequate notion. In the primitive church, the influence of truth
      was very powerfully strengthened by an opinion, which, however it
      may deserve respect for its usefulness and antiquity, has not
      been found agreeable to experience. It was universally believed,
      that the end of the world, and the kingdom of heaven, were at
      hand. 591 The near approach of this wonderful event had been
      predicted by the apostles; the tradition of it was preserved by
      their earliest disciples, and those who understood in their
      literal senses the discourse of Christ himself, were obliged to
      expect the second and glorious coming of the Son of Man in the
      clouds, before that generation was totally extinguished, which
      had beheld his humble condition upon earth, and which might still
      be witness of the calamities of the Jews under Vespasian or
      Hadrian. The revolution of seventeen centuries has instructed us
      not to press too closely the mysterious language of prophecy and
      revelation; but as long as, for wise purposes, this error was
      permitted to subsist in the church, it was productive of the most
      salutary effects on the faith and practice of Christians, who
      lived in the awful expectation of that moment, when the globe
      itself, and all the various race of mankind, should tremble at
      the appearance of their divine Judge. 60


      591 (return) [ This was, in fact, an integral part of the Jewish
      notion of the Messiah, from which the minds of the apostles
      themselves were but gradually detached. See Bertholdt,
      Christologia Judæorum, concluding chapters—M.]


      60 (return) [ This expectation was countenanced by the
      twenty-fourth chapter of St. Matthew, and by the first epistle of
      St. Paul to the Thessalonians. Erasmus removes the difficulty by
      the help of allegory and metaphor; and the learned Grotius
      ventures to insinuate, that, for wise purposes, the pious
      deception was permitted to take place. * Note: Some modern
      theologians explain it without discovering either allegory or
      deception. They say, that Jesus Christ, after having proclaimed
      the ruin of Jerusalem and of the Temple, speaks of his second
      coming and the sings which were to precede it; but those who
      believed that the moment was near deceived themselves as to the
      sense of two words, an error which still subsists in our versions
      of the Gospel according to St. Matthew, xxiv. 29, 34. In verse
      29, we read, “Immediately after the tribulation of those days
      shall the sun be darkened,” &c. The Greek word signifies all at
      once, suddenly, not immediately; so that it signifies only the
      sudden appearance of the signs which Jesus Christ announces not
      the shortness of the interval which was to separate them from the
      “days of tribulation,” of which he was speaking. The verse 34 is
      this “Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass till
      all these things shall be fulfilled.” Jesus, speaking to his
      disciples, uses these words, which the translators have rendered
      by this generation, but which means the race, the filiation of my
      disciples; that is, he speaks of a class of men, not of a
      generation. The true sense then, according to these learned men,
      is, In truth I tell you that this race of men, of which you are
      the commencement, shall not pass away till this shall take place;
      that is to say, the succession of Christians shall not cease till
      his coming. See Commentary of M. Paulus on the New Test., edit.
      1802, tom. iii. p. 445,—446.—G. ——Others, as Rosenmuller and
      Kuinoel, in loc., confine this passage to a highly figurative
      description of the ruins of the Jewish city and polity.—M.]


      Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.—Part IV.


      The ancient and popular doctrine of the Millennium was intimately
      connected with the second coming of Christ. As the works of the
      creation had been finished in six days, their duration in their
      present state, according to a tradition which was attributed to
      the prophet Elijah, was fixed to six thousand years. 61 By the
      same analogy it was inferred, that this long period of labor and
      contention, which was now almost elapsed, 62 would be succeeded
      by a joyful Sabbath of a thousand years; and that Christ, with
      the triumphant band of the saints and the elect who had escaped
      death, or who had been miraculously revived, would reign upon
      earth till the time appointed for the last and general
      resurrection. So pleasing was this hope to the mind of believers,
      that the _New Jerusalem_, the seat of this blissful kingdom, was
      quickly adorned with all the gayest colors of the imagination. A
      felicity consisting only of pure and spiritual pleasure would
      have appeared too refined for its inhabitants, who were still
      supposed to possess their human nature and senses. A garden of
      Eden, with the amusements of the pastoral life, was no longer
      suited to the advanced state of society which prevailed under the
      Roman empire. A city was therefore erected of gold and precious
      stones, and a supernatural plenty of corn and wine was bestowed
      on the adjacent territory; in the free enjoyment of whose
      spontaneous productions the happy and benevolent people was never
      to be restrained by any jealous laws of exclusive property. 63
      The assurance of such a Millennium was carefully inculcated by a
      succession of fathers from Justin Martyr, 64 and Irenæus, who
      conversed with the immediate disciples of the apostles, down to
      Lactantius, who was preceptor to the son of Constantine. 65
      Though it might not be universally received, it appears to have
      been the reigning sentiment of the orthodox believers; and it
      seems so well adapted to the desires and apprehensions of
      mankind, that it must have contributed in a very considerable
      degree to the progress of the Christian faith. But when the
      edifice of the church was almost completed, the temporary support
      was laid aside. The doctrine of Christ’s reign upon earth was at
      first treated as a profound allegory, was considered by degrees
      as a doubtful and useless opinion, and was at length rejected as
      the absurd invention of heresy and fanaticism. 66 A mysterious
      prophecy, which still forms a part of the sacred canon, but which
      was thought to favor the exploded sentiment, has very narrowly
      escaped the proscription of the church. 67


      61 (return) [ See Burnet’s Sacred Theory, part iii. c. 5. This
      tradition may be traced as high as the the author of Epistle of
      Barnabas, who wrote in the first century, and who seems to have
      been half a Jew. * Note: In fact it is purely Jewish. See
      Mosheim, De Reb. Christ. ii. 8. Lightfoot’s Works, 8vo. edit.
      vol. iii. p. 37. Bertholdt, Christologia Judæorum ch. 38.—M.]


      62 (return) [ The primitive church of Antioch computed almost
      6000 years from the creation of the world to the birth of Christ.
      Africanus, Lactantius, and the Greek church, have reduced that
      number to 5500, and Eusebius has contented himself with 5200
      years. These calculations were formed on the Septuagint, which
      was universally received during the six first centuries. The
      authority of the vulgate and of the Hebrew text has determined
      the moderns, Protestants as well as Catholics, to prefer a period
      of about 4000 years; though, in the study of profane antiquity,
      they often find themselves straitened by those narrow limits. *
      Note: Most of the more learned modern English Protestants, Dr.
      Hales, Mr. Faber, Dr. Russel, as well as the Continental writers,
      adopt the larger chronology. There is little doubt that the
      narrower system was framed by the Jews of Tiberias; it was
      clearly neither that of St. Paul, nor of Josephus, nor of the
      Samaritan Text. It is greatly to be regretted that the chronology
      of the earlier Scriptures should ever have been made a religious
      question—M.]


      63 (return) [ Most of these pictures were borrowed from a
      misrepresentation of Isaiah, Daniel, and the Apocalypse. One of
      the grossest images may be found in Irenæus, (l. v. p. 455,) the
      disciple of Papias, who had seen the apostle St. John.]


      64 (return) [ See the second dialogue of Justin with Triphon, and
      the seventh book of Lactantius. It is unnecessary to allege all
      the intermediate fathers, as the fact is not disputed. Yet the
      curious reader may consult Daille de Uus Patrum, l. ii. c. 4.]


      65 (return) [ The testimony of Justin of his own faith and that
      of his orthodox brethren, in the doctrine of a Millennium, is
      delivered in the clearest and most solemn manner, (Dialog. cum
      Tryphonte Jud. p. 177, 178, edit. Benedictin.) If in the
      beginning of this important passage there is any thing like an
      inconsistency, we may impute it, as we think proper, either to
      the author or to his transcribers. * Note: The Millenium is
      described in what once stood as the XLIst Article of the English
      Church (see Collier, Eccles. Hist., for Articles of Edw. VI.) as
      “a fable of Jewish dotage.” The whole of these gross and earthly
      images may be traced in the works which treat on the Jewish
      traditions, in Lightfoot, Schoetgen, and Eisenmenger; “Das
      enthdeckte Judenthum” t. ii 809; and briefly in Bertholdt, i. c.
      38, 39.—M.]


      66 (return) [ Dupin, Bibliotheque Ecclesiastique, tom. i. p. 223,
      tom. ii. p. 366, and Mosheim, p. 720; though the latter of these
      learned divines is not altogether candid on this occasion.]


      67 (return) [ In the council of Laodicea, (about the year 360,)
      the Apocalypse was tacitly excluded from the sacred canon, by the
      same churches of Asia to which it is addressed; and we may learn
      from the complaint of Sulpicius Severus, that their sentence had
      been ratified by the greater number of Christians of his time.
      From what causes then is the Apocalypse at present so generally
      received by the Greek, the Roman, and the Protestant churches?
      The following ones may be assigned. 1. The Greeks were subdued by
      the authority of an impostor, who, in the sixth century, assumed
      the character of Dionysius the Areopagite. 2. A just apprehension
      that the grammarians might become more important than the
      theologians, engaged the council of Trent to fix the seal of
      their infallibility on all the books of Scripture contained in
      the Latin Vulgate, in the number of which the Apocalypse was
      fortunately included. (Fr. Paolo, Istoria del Concilio
      Tridentino, l. ii.) 3. The advantage of turning those mysterious
      prophecies against the See of Rome, inspired the Protestants with
      uncommon veneration for so useful an ally. See the ingenious and
      elegant discourses of the present bishop of Litchfield on that
      unpromising subject. * Note: The exclusion of the Apocalypse is
      not improbably assigned to its obvious unfitness to be read in
      churches. It is to be feared that a history of the interpretation
      of the Apocalypse would not give a very favorable view either of
      the wisdom or the charity of the successive ages of Christianity.
      Wetstein’s interpretation, differently modified, is adopted by
      most Continental scholars.—M.]


      Whilst the happiness and glory of a temporal reign were promised
      to the disciples of Christ, the most dreadful calamities were
      denounced against an unbelieving world. The edification of a new
      Jerusalem was to advance by equal steps with the destruction of
      the mystic Babylon; and as long as the emperors who reigned
      before Constantine persisted in the profession of idolatry, the
      epithet of Babylon was applied to the city and to the empire of
      Rome. A regular series was prepared of all the moral and physical
      evils which can afflict a flourishing nation; intestine discord,
      and the invasion of the fiercest barbarians from the unknown
      regions of the North; pestilence and famine, comets and eclipses,
      earthquakes and inundations. 68 All these were only so many
      preparatory and alarming signs of the great catastrophe of Rome,
      when the country of the Scipios and Cæsars should be consumed by
      a flame from Heaven, and the city of the seven hills, with her
      palaces, her temples, and her triumphal arches, should be buried
      in a vast lake of fire and brimstone. It might, however, afford
      some consolation to Roman vanity, that the period of their empire
      would be that of the world itself; which, as it had once perished
      by the element of water, was destined to experience a second and
      a speedy destruction from the element of fire. In the opinion of
      a general conflagration, the faith of the Christian very happily
      coincided with the tradition of the East, the philosophy of the
      Stoics, and the analogy of Nature; and even the country, which,
      from religious motives, had been chosen for the origin and
      principal scene of the conflagration, was the best adapted for
      that purpose by natural and physical causes; by its deep caverns,
      beds of sulphur, and numerous volcanoes, of which those of Ætna,
      of Vesuvius, and of Lipari, exhibit a very imperfect
      representation. The calmest and most intrepid sceptic could not
      refuse to acknowledge that the destruction of the present system
      of the world by fire was in itself extremely probable. The
      Christian, who founded his belief much less on the fallacious
      arguments of reason than on the authority of tradition and the
      interpretation of Scripture, expected it with terror and
      confidence as a certain and approaching event; and as his mind
      was perpetually filled with the solemn idea, he considered every
      disaster that happened to the empire as an infallible symptom of
      an expiring world. 69


      68 (return) [ Lactantius (Institut. Divin. vii. 15, &c.) relates
      the dismal talk of futurity with great spirit and eloquence. *
      Note: Lactantius had a notion of a great Asiatic empire, which
      was previously to rise on the ruins of the Roman: quod Romanum
      nomen animus dicere, sed dicam. quia futurum est tolletur de
      terra, et impere. Asiam revertetur.—M.]


      69 (return) [ On this subject every reader of taste will be
      entertained with the third part of Burnet’s Sacred Theory. He
      blends philosophy, Scripture, and tradition, into one magnificent
      system; in the description of which he displays a strength of
      fancy not inferior to that of Milton himself.]


      The condemnation of the wisest and most virtuous of the Pagans,
      on account of their ignorance or disbelief of the divine truth,
      seems to offend the reason and the humanity of the present age.
      70 But the primitive church, whose faith was of a much firmer
      consistence, delivered over, without hesitation, to eternal
      torture, the far greater part of the human species. A charitable
      hope might perhaps be indulged in favor of Socrates, or some
      other sages of antiquity, who had consulted the light of reason
      before that of the gospel had arisen. 71 But it was unanimously
      affirmed, that those who, since the birth or the death of Christ,
      had obstinately persisted in the worship of the dæmons, neither
      deserved nor could expect a pardon from the irritated justice of
      the Deity. These rigid sentiments, which had been unknown to the
      ancient world, appear to have infused a spirit of bitterness into
      a system of love and harmony. The ties of blood and friendship
      were frequently torn asunder by the difference of religious
      faith; and the Christians, who, in this world, found themselves
      oppressed by the power of the Pagans, were sometimes seduced by
      resentment and spiritual pride to delight in the prospect of
      their future triumph. “You are fond of spectacles,” exclaims the
      stern Tertullian; “expect the greatest of all spectacles, the
      last and eternal judgment of the universe. 71b How shall I
      admire, how laugh, how rejoice, how exult, when I behold so many
      proud monarchs, so many fancied gods, groaning in the lowest
      abyss of darkness; so many magistrates, who persecuted the name
      of the Lord, liquefying in fiercer fires than they ever kindled
      against the Christians; so many sage philosophers blushing in
      red-hot flames with their deluded scholars; so many celebrated
      poets trembling before the tribunal, not of Minos, but of Christ;
      so many tragedians, more tuneful in the expression of their own
      sufferings; so many dancers.”


      711 But the humanity of the reader will permit me to draw a veil
      over the rest of this infernal description, which the zealous
      African pursues in a long variety of affected and unfeeling
      witticisms. 72


      70 (return) [ And yet whatever may be the language of
      individuals, it is still the public doctrine of all the Christian
      churches; nor can even our own refuse to admit the conclusions
      which must be drawn from the viiith and the xviiith of her
      Articles. The Jansenists, who have so diligently studied the
      works of the fathers, maintain this sentiment with distinguished
      zeal; and the learned M. de Tillemont never dismisses a virtuous
      emperor without pronouncing his damnation. Zuinglius is perhaps
      the only leader of a party who has ever adopted the milder
      sentiment, and he gave no less offence to the Lutherans than to
      the Catholics. See Bossuet, Histoire des Variations des Eglises
      Protestantes, l. ii. c. 19—22.]


      71 (return) [ Justin and Clemens of Alexandria allow that some of
      the philosophers were instructed by the Logos; confounding its
      double signification of the human reason, and of the Divine
      Word.]


      711 (return) [ This translation is not exact: the first sentence
      is imperfect. Tertullian says, Ille dies nationibus insperatus,
      ille derisus, cum tanta sacculi vetustas et tot ejus nativitates
      uno igne haurientur. The text does not authorize the exaggerated
      expressions, so many magistrates, so many sago philosophers, so
      many poets, &c.; but simply magistrates, philosophers, poets.—G.
      —It is not clear that Gibbon’s version or paraphrase is
      incorrect: Tertullian writes, tot tantosque reges item præsides,
      &c.—M.]



      71b (return) [Tertullian, de Spectaculis, c. 30. In order to
      ascertain the degree of authority which the zealous African had
      acquired it may be sufficient to allege the testimony of Cyprian,
      the doctor and guide of all the western churches. (See Prudent.
      Hym. xiii. 100.) As often as he applied himself to his daily
      study of the writings of Tertullian, he was accustomed to say,
      “Da mihi magistrum, Give me my master.” (Hieronym. de Viris
      Illustribus, tom. i. p. 284.)]


      72 (return) [ The object of Tertullian’s vehemence in his
      Treatise, was to keep the Christians away from the secular games
      celebrated by the Emperor Severus: It has not prevented him from
      showing himself in other places full of benevolence and charity
      towards unbelievers: the spirit of the gospel has sometimes
      prevailed over the violence of human passions: Qui ergo putaveris
      nihil nos de salute Cæsaris curare (he says in his Apology)
      inspice Dei voces, literas nostras. Scitote ex illis præceptum
      esse nobis ad redudantionem, benignitates etiam pro inimicis Deum
      orare, et pro persecutoribus cona precari. Sed etiam nominatim
      atque manifeste orate inquit (Christus) pro regibus et pro
      principibus et potestatibus ut omnia sint tranquilla vobis Tert.
      Apol. c. 31.—G. ——It would be wiser for Christianity, retreating
      upon its genuine records in the New Testament, to disclaim this
      fierce African, than to identify itself with his furious
      invectives by unsatisfactory apologies for their unchristian
      fanaticism.—M.]


      Doubtless there were many among the primitive Christians of a
      temper more suitable to the meekness and charity of their
      profession. There were many who felt a sincere compassion for the
      danger of their friends and countrymen, and who exerted the most
      benevolent zeal to save them from the impending destruction.


      The careless Polytheist, assailed by new and unexpected terrors,
      against which neither his priests nor his philosophers could
      afford him any certain protection, was very frequently terrified
      and subdued by the menace of eternal tortures. His fears might
      assist the progress of his faith and reason; and if he could once
      persuade himself to suspect that the Christian religion might
      possibly be true, it became an easy task to convince him that it
      was the safest and most prudent party that he could possibly
      embrace.


      III. The supernatural gifts, which even in this life were
      ascribed to the Christians above the rest of mankind, must have
      conduced to their own comfort, and very frequently to the
      conviction of infidels. Besides the occasional prodigies, which
      might sometimes be effected by the immediate interposition of the
      Deity when he suspended the laws of Nature for the service of
      religion, the Christian church, from the time of the apostles and
      their first disciples, 73 has claimed an uninterrupted succession
      of miraculous powers, the gift of tongues, of vision, and of
      prophecy, the power of expelling dæmons, of healing the sick, and
      of raising the dead. The knowledge of foreign languages was
      frequently communicated to the contemporaries of Irenæus, though
      Irenæus himself was left to struggle with the difficulties of a
      barbarous dialect, whilst he preached the gospel to the natives
      of Gaul. 74 The divine inspiration, whether it was conveyed in
      the form of a waking or of a sleeping vision, is described as a
      favor very liberally bestowed on all ranks of the faithful, on
      women as on elders, on boys as well as upon bishops. When their
      devout minds were sufficiently prepared by a course of prayer, of
      fasting, and of vigils, to receive the extraordinary impulse,
      they were transported out of their senses, and delivered in
      ecstasy what was inspired, being mere organs of the Holy Spirit,
      just as a pipe or flute is of him who blows into it. 75 We may
      add, that the design of these visions was, for the most part,
      either to disclose the future history, or to guide the present
      administration, of the church. The expulsion of the dæmons from
      the bodies of those unhappy persons whom they had been permitted
      to torment, was considered as a signal though ordinary triumph of
      religion, and is repeatedly alleged by the ancient apoligists, as
      the most convincing evidence of the truth of Christianity. The
      awful ceremony was usually performed in a public manner, and in
      the presence of a great number of spectators; the patient was
      relieved by the power or skill of the exorcist, and the
      vanquished dæmon was heard to confess that he was one of the
      fabled gods of antiquity, who had impiously usurped the adoration
      of mankind. 76 But the miraculous cure of diseases of the most
      inveterate or even preternatural kind can no longer occasion any
      surprise, when we recollect, that in the days of Irenæus, about
      the end of the second century, the resurrection of the dead was
      very far from being esteemed an uncommon event; that the miracle
      was frequently performed on necessary occasions, by great fasting
      and the joint supplication of the church of the place, and that
      the persons thus restored to their prayers had lived afterwards
      among them many years. 77 At such a period, when faith could
      boast of so many wonderful victories over death, it seems
      difficult to account for the scepticism of those philosophers,
      who still rejected and derided the doctrine of the resurrection.
      A noble Grecian had rested on this important ground the whole
      controversy, and promised Theophilus, Bishop of Antioch, that if
      he could be gratified with the sight of a single person who had
      been actually raised from the dead, he would immediately embrace
      the Christian religion. It is somewhat remarkable, that the
      prelate of the first eastern church, however anxious for the
      conversion of his friend, thought proper to decline this fair and
      reasonable challenge. 78


      73 (return) [ Notwithstanding the evasions of Dr. Middleton, it
      is impossible to overlook the clear traces of visions and
      inspiration, which may be found in the apostolic fathers. * Note:
      Gibbon should have noticed the distinct and remarkable passage
      from Chrysostom, quoted by Middleton, (Works, vol. i. p. 105,) in
      which he affirms the long discontinuance of miracles as a
      notorious fact.—M.]


      74 (return) [ Irenæus adv. Hæres. Proem. p.3 Dr. Middleton (Free
      Inquiry, p. 96, &c.) observes, that as this pretension of all
      others was the most difficult to support by art, it was the
      soonest given up. The observation suits his hypothesis. * Note:
      This passage of Irenæus contains no allusion to the gift of
      tongues; it is merely an apology for a rude and unpolished Greek
      style, which could not be expected from one who passed his life
      in a remote and barbarous province, and was continually obliged
      to speak the Celtic language.—M. Note: Except in the life of
      Pachomius, an Egyptian monk of the fourth century. (see Jortin,
      Ecc. Hist. i. p. 368, edit. 1805,) and the latter (not earlier)
      lives of Xavier, there is no claim laid to the gift of tongues
      since the time of Irenæus; and of this claim, Xavier’s own
      letters are profoundly silent. See Douglas’s Criterion, p. 76
      edit. 1807.—M.]


      75 (return) [ Athenagoras in Legatione. Justin Martyr, Cohort. ad
      Gentes Tertullian advers. Marcionit. l. iv. These descriptions
      are not very unlike the prophetic fury, for which Cicero (de
      Divinat.ii. 54) expresses so little reverence.]


      76 (return) [ Tertullian (Apolog. c. 23) throws out a bold
      defiance to the Pagan magistrates. Of the primitive miracles, the
      power of exorcising is the only one which has been assumed by
      Protestants. * Note: But by Protestants neither of the most
      enlightened ages nor most reasoning minds.—M.]


      77 (return) [ Irenæus adv. Hæreses, l. ii. 56, 57, l. v. c. 6.
      Mr. Dodwell (Dissertat. ad Irenæum, ii. 42) concludes, that the
      second century was still more fertile in miracles than the first.
      * Note: It is difficult to answer Middleton’s objection to this
      statement of Irenæus: “It is very strange, that from the time of
      the apostles there is not a single instance of this miracle to be
      found in the three first centuries; except a single case,
      slightly intimated in Eusebius, from the Works of Papias; which
      he seems to rank among the other fabulous stories delivered by
      that weak man.” Middleton, Works, vol. i. p. 59. Bp. Douglas
      (Criterion, p 389) would consider Irenæus to speak of what had
      “been performed formerly.” not in his own time.—M.]


      78 (return) [ Theophilus ad Autolycum, l. i. p. 345. Edit.
      Benedictin. Paris, 1742. * Note: A candid sceptic might discern
      some impropriety in the Bishop being called upon to perform a
      miracle on demand.—M.]


      The miracles of the primitive church, after obtaining the
      sanction of ages, have been lately attacked in a very free and
      ingenious inquiry, 79 which, though it has met with the most
      favorable reception from the public, appears to have excited a
      general scandal among the divines of our own as well as of the
      other Protestant churches of Europe. 80 Our different sentiments
      on this subject will be much less influenced by any particular
      arguments, than by our habits of study and reflection; and, above
      all, by the degree of evidence which we have accustomed ourselves
      to require for the proof of a miraculous event. The duty of an
      historian does not call upon him to interpose his private
      judgment in this nice and important controversy; but he ought not
      to dissemble the difficulty of adopting such a theory as may
      reconcile the interest of religion with that of reason, of making
      a proper application of that theory, and of defining with
      precision the limits of that happy period, exempt from error and
      from deceit, to which we might be disposed to extend the gift of
      supernatural powers. From the first of the fathers to the last of
      the popes, a succession of bishops, of saints, of martyrs, and of
      miracles, is continued without interruption; and the progress of
      superstition was so gradual, and almost imperceptible, that we
      know not in what particular link we should break the chain of
      tradition. Every age bears testimony to the wonderful events by
      which it was distinguished, and its testimony appears no less
      weighty and respectable than that of the preceding generation,
      till we are insensibly led on to accuse our own inconsistency, if
      in the eighth or in the twelfth century we deny to the venerable
      Bede, or to the holy Bernard, the same degree of confidence
      which, in the second century, we had so liberally granted to
      Justin or to Irenæus. 81 If the truth of any of those miracles is
      appreciated by their apparent use and propriety, every age had
      unbelievers to convince, heretics to confute, and idolatrous
      nations to convert; and sufficient motives might always be
      produced to justify the interposition of Heaven. And yet, since
      every friend to revelation is persuaded of the reality, and every
      reasonable man is convinced of the cessation, of miraculous
      powers, it is evident that there must have been _some period_ in
      which they were either suddenly or gradually withdrawn from the
      Christian church. Whatever æra is chosen for that purpose, the
      death of the apostles, the conversion of the Roman empire, or the
      extinction of the Arian heresy, 82 the insensibility of the
      Christians who lived at that time will equally afford a just
      matter of surprise. They still supported their pretensions after
      they had lost their power. Credulity performed the office of
      faith; fanaticism was permitted to assume the language of
      inspiration, and the effects of accident or contrivance were
      ascribed to supernatural causes. The recent experience of genuine
      miracles should have instructed the Christian world in the ways
      of Providence, and habituated their eye (if we may use a very
      inadequate expression) to the style of the divine artist. Should
      the most skilful painter of modern Italy presume to decorate his
      feeble imitations with the name of Raphæl or of Correggio, the
      insolent fraud would be soon discovered, and indignantly
      rejected.


      79 (return) [ Dr. Middleton sent out his Introduction in the year
      1747, published his Free Inquiry in 1749, and before his death,
      which happened in 1750, he had prepared a vindication of it
      against his numerous adversaries.]


      80 (return) [ The university of Oxford conferred degrees on his
      opponents. From the indignation of Mosheim, (p. 221,) we may
      discover the sentiments of the Lutheran divines. * Note: Yet many
      Protestant divines will now without reluctance confine miracles
      to the time of the apostles, or at least to the first century.—M]



      81 (return) [It may seem somewhat remarkable, that Bernard of
      Clairvaux, who records so many miracles of his friend St.
      Malachi, never takes any notice of his own, which, in their turn,
      however, are carefully related by his companions and disciples.
      In the long series of ecclesiastical history, does there exist a
      single instance of a saint asserting that he himself possessed
      the gift of miracles?]


      82 (return) [ The conversion of Constantine is the æra which is
      most usually fixed by Protestants. The more rational divines are
      unwilling to admit the miracles of the ivth, whilst the more
      credulous are unwilling to reject those of the vth century. *
      Note: All this appears to proceed on the principle that any
      distinct line can be drawn in an unphilosophic age between
      wonders and miracles, or between what piety, from their
      unexpected and extraordinary nature, the marvellous concurrence
      of secondary causes to some remarkable end, may consider
      providential interpositions, and miracles strictly so called, in
      which the laws of nature are suspended or violated. It is
      impossible to assign, on one side, limits to human credulity, on
      the other, to the influence of the imagination on the bodily
      frame; but some of the miracles recorded in the Gospels are such
      palpable impossibilities, according to the known laws and
      operations of nature, that if recorded on sufficient evidence,
      and the evidence we believe to be that of eye-witnesses, we
      cannot reject them, without either asserting, with Hume, that no
      evidence can prove a miracle, or that the Author of Nature has no
      power of suspending its ordinary laws. But which of the
      post-apostolic miracles will bear this test?—M.]


      Whatever opinion may be entertained of the miracles of the
      primitive church since the time of the apostles, this unresisting
      softness of temper, so conspicuous among the believers of the
      second and third centuries, proved of some accidental benefit to
      the cause of truth and religion. In modern times, a latent and
      even involuntary scepticism adheres to the most pious
      dispositions. Their admission of supernatural truths is much less
      an active consent than a cold and passive acquiescence.
      Accustomed long since to observe and to respect the invariable
      order of Nature, our reason, or at least our imagination, is not
      sufficiently prepared to sustain the visible action of the Deity.


      But, in the first ages of Christianity, the situation of mankind
      was extremely different. The most curious, or the most credulous,
      among the Pagans, were often persuaded to enter into a society
      which asserted an actual claim of miraculous powers. The
      primitive Christians perpetually trod on mystic ground, and their
      minds were exercised by the habits of believing the most
      extraordinary events. They felt, or they fancied, that on every
      side they were incessantly assaulted by dæmons, comforted by
      visions, instructed by prophecy, and surprisingly delivered from
      danger, sickness, and from death itself, by the supplications of
      the church. The real or imaginary prodigies, of which they so
      frequently conceived themselves to be the objects, the
      instruments, or the spectators, very happily disposed them to
      adopt with the same ease, but with far greater justice, the
      authentic wonders of the evangelic history; and thus miracles
      that exceeded not the measure of their own experience, inspired
      them with the most lively assurance of mysteries which were
      acknowledged to surpass the limits of their understanding. It is
      this deep impression of supernatural truths which has been so
      much celebrated under the name of faith; a state of mind
      described as the surest pledge of the divine favor and of future
      felicity, and recommended as the first, or perhaps the only merit
      of a Christian. According to the more rigid doctors, the moral
      virtues, which may be equally practised by infidels, are
      destitute of any value or efficacy in the work of our
      justification.


      Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.—Part V.


      IV. But the primitive Christian demonstrated his faith by his
      virtues; and it was very justly supposed that the divine
      persuasion, which enlightened or subdued the understanding, must,
      at the same time, purify the heart, and direct the actions, of
      the believer. The first apologists of Christianity who justify
      the innocence of their brethren, and the writers of a later
      period who celebrate the sanctity of their ancestors, display, in
      the most lively colors, the reformation of manners which was
      introduced into the world by the preaching of the gospel. As it
      is my intention to remark only such human causes as were
      permitted to second the influence of revelation, I shall slightly
      mention two motives which might naturally render the lives of the
      primitive Christians much purer and more austere than those of
      their Pagan contemporaries, or their degenerate successors;
      repentance for their past sins, and the laudable desire of
      supporting the reputation of the society in which they were
      engaged. 83


      83 (return) [ These, in the opinion of the editor, are the most
      uncandid paragraphs in Gibbon’s History. He ought either, with
      manly courage, to have denied the moral reformation introduced by
      Christianity, or fairly to have investigated all its motives; not
      to have confined himself to an insidious and sarcastic
      description of the less pure and generous elements of the
      Christian character as it appeared even at that early time.—M.]


      It is a very ancient reproach, suggested by the ignorance or the
      malice of infidelity, that the Christians allured into their
      party the most atrocious criminals, who, as soon as they were
      touched by a sense of remorse, were easily persuaded to wash
      away, in the water of baptism, the guilt of their past conduct,
      for which the temples of the gods refused to grant them any
      expiation. But this reproach, when it is cleared from
      misrepresentation, contributes as much to the honor as it did to
      the increase of the church. The friends of Christianity may
      acknowledge without a blush that many of the most eminent saints
      had been before their baptism the most abandoned sinners. Those
      persons, who in the world had followed, though in an imperfect
      manner, the dictates of benevolence and propriety, derived such a
      calm satisfaction from the opinion of their own rectitude, as
      rendered them much less susceptible of the sudden emotions of
      shame, of grief, and of terror, which have given birth to so many
      wonderful conversions. After the example of their divine Master,
      the missionaries of the gospel disdained not the society of men,
      and especially of women, oppressed by the consciousness, and very
      often by the effects, of their vices. As they emerged from sin
      and superstition to the glorious hope of immortality, they
      resolved to devote themselves to a life, not only of virtue, but
      of penitence. The desire of perfection became the ruling passion
      of their soul; and it is well known that, while reason embraces a
      cold mediocrity, our passions hurry us, with rapid violence, over
      the space which lies between the most opposite extremes. 83b


      83b (return) [The imputations of Celsus and Julian, with the
      defence of the fathers, are very fairly stated by Spanheim,
      Commentaire sur les Cesars de Julian, p. 468.]


      When the new converts had been enrolled in the number of the
      faithful, and were admitted to the sacraments of the church, they
      found themselves restrained from relapsing into their past
      disorders by another consideration of a less spiritual, but of a
      very innocent and respectable nature. Any particular society that
      has departed from the great body of the nation, or the religion
      to which it belonged, immediately becomes the object of universal
      as well as invidious observation. In proportion to the smallness
      of its numbers, the character of the society may be affected by
      the virtues and vices of the persons who compose it; and every
      member is engaged to watch with the most vigilant attention over
      his own behavior, and over that of his brethren, since, as he
      must expect to incur a part of the common disgrace, he may hope
      to enjoy a share of the common reputation. When the Christians of
      Bithynia were brought before the tribunal of the younger Pliny,
      they assured the proconsul, that, far from being engaged in any
      unlawful conspiracy, they were bound by a solemn obligation to
      abstain from the commission of those crimes which disturb the
      private or public peace of society, from theft, robbery,
      adultery, perjury, and fraud. 84 841 Near a century afterwards,
      Tertullian, with an honest pride, could boast, that very few
      Christians had suffered by the hand of the executioner, except on
      account of their religion. 85 Their serious and sequestered life,
      averse to the gay luxury of the age, inured them to chastity,
      temperance, economy, and all the sober and domestic virtues. As
      the greater number were of some trade or profession, it was
      incumbent on them, by the strictest integrity and the fairest
      dealing, to remove the suspicions which the profane are too apt
      to conceive against the appearances of sanctity. The contempt of
      the world exercised them in the habits of humility, meekness, and
      patience. The more they were persecuted, the more closely they
      adhered to each other. Their mutual charity and unsuspecting
      confidence has been remarked by infidels, and was too often
      abused by perfidious friends. 86


      84 (return) [ Plin. Epist. x. 97. * Note: Is not the sense of
      Tertullian rather, if guilty of any other offence, he had thereby
      ceased to be a Christian?—M.]


      841 (return) [ And this blamelessness was fully admitted by the
      candid and enlightened Roman.—M.]


      85 (return) [ Tertullian, Apolog. c. 44. He adds, however, with
      some degree of hesitation, “Aut si aliud, jam non Christianus.” *
      Note: Tertullian says positively no Christian, nemo illic
      Christianus; for the rest, the limitation which he himself
      subjoins, and which Gibbon quotes in the foregoing note,
      diminishes the force of this assertion, and appears to prove that
      at least he knew none such.—G.]


      86 (return) [ The philosopher Peregrinus (of whose life and death
      Lucian has left us so entertaining an account) imposed, for a
      long time, on the credulous simplicity of the Christians of
      Asia.]


      It is a very honorable circumstance for the morals of the
      primitive Christians, that even their faults, or rather errors,
      were derived from an excess of virtue. The bishops and doctors of
      the church, whose evidence attests, and whose authority might
      influence, the professions, the principles, and even the practice
      of their contemporaries, had studied the Scriptures with less
      skill than devotion; and they often received, in the most literal
      sense, those rigid precepts of Christ and the apostles, to which
      the prudence of succeeding commentators has applied a looser and
      more figurative mode of interpretation. Ambitious to exalt the
      perfection of the gospel above the wisdom of philosophy, the
      zealous fathers have carried the duties of self-mortification, of
      purity, and of patience, to a height which it is scarcely
      possible to attain, and much less to preserve, in our present
      state of weakness and corruption. A doctrine so extraordinary and
      so sublime must inevitably command the veneration of the people;
      but it was ill calculated to obtain the suffrage of those worldly
      philosophers who, in the conduct of this transitory life, consult
      only the feelings of nature and the interest of society. 87


      87 (return) [ See a very judicious treatise of Barbeyrac sur la
      Morale des Peres.]


      There are two very natural propensities which we may distinguish
      in the most virtuous and liberal dispositions, the love of
      pleasure and the love of action. If the former is refined by art
      and learning, improved by the charms of social intercourse, and
      corrected by a just regard to economy, to health, and to
      reputation, it is productive of the greatest part of the
      happiness of private life. The love of action is a principle of a
      much stronger and more doubtful nature. It often leads to anger,
      to ambition, and to revenge; but when it is guided by the sense
      of propriety and benevolence, it becomes the parent of every
      virtue, and if those virtues are accompanied with equal
      abilities, a family, a state, or an empire may be indebted for
      their safety and prosperity to the undaunted courage of a single
      man. To the love of pleasure we may therefore ascribe most of the
      agreeable, to the love of action we may attribute most of the
      useful and respectable, qualifications. The character in which
      both the one and the other should be united and harmonized would
      seem to constitute the most perfect idea of human nature. The
      insensible and inactive disposition, which should be supposed
      alike destitute of both, would be rejected, by the common consent
      of mankind, as utterly incapable of procuring any happiness to
      the individual, or any public benefit to the world. But it was
      not in _this_ world that the primitive Christians were desirous
      of making themselves either agreeable or useful. 871


      871 (return) [ El que me fait cette homelie semi-stoicienne,
      semi-epicurienne? t’on jamais regarde l’amour du plaisir comme
      l’un des principes de la perfection morale? Et de quel droit
      faites vous de l’amour de l’action, et de l’amour du plaisir, les
      seuls elemens de l’etre humain? Est ce que vous faites
      abstraction de la verite en elle-meme, de la conscience et du
      sentiment du devoir? Est ce que vous ne sentez point, par
      exemple, que le sacrifice du moi a la justice et a la verite, est
      aussi dans le coeur de l’homme: que tout n’est pas pour lui
      action ou plaisir, et que dans le bien ce n’est pas le mouvement,
      mais la verite, qu’il cherche? Et puis * * Thucy dide et Tacite.
      ces maitres de l’histoire, ont ils jamais introduits dans leur
      recits un fragment de dissertation sur le plaisir et sur
      l’action. Villemain Cours de Lit. Franc part ii. Lecon v.—M.]


      The acquisition of knowledge, the exercise of our reason or
      fancy, and the cheerful flow of unguarded conversation, may
      employ the leisure of a liberal mind. Such amusements, however,
      were rejected with abhorrence, or admitted with the utmost
      caution, by the severity of the fathers, who despised all
      knowledge that was not useful to salvation, and who considered
      all levity of discours as a criminal abuse of the gift of speech.
      In our present state of existence the body is so inseparably
      connected with the soul, that it seems to be our interest to
      taste, with innocence and moderation, the enjoyments of which
      that faithful companion is susceptible. Very different was the
      reasoning of our devout predecessors; vainly aspiring to imitate
      the perfection of angels, they disdained, or they affected to
      disdain, every earthly and corporeal delight. 88 Some of our
      senses indeed are necessary for our preservation, others for our
      subsistence, and others again for our information; and thus far
      it was impossible to reject the use of them. The first sensation
      of pleasure was marked as the first moment of their abuse. The
      unfeeling candidate for heaven was instructed, not only to resist
      the grosser allurements of the taste or smell, but even to shut
      his ears against the profane harmony of sounds, and to view with
      indifference the most finished productions of human art. Gay
      apparel, magnificent houses, and elegant furniture, were supposed
      to unite the double guilt of pride and of sensuality; a simple
      and mortified appearance was more suitable to the Christian who
      was certain of his sins and doubtful of his salvation. In their
      censures of luxury the fathers are extremely minute and
      circumstantial; 89 and among the various articles which excite
      their pious indignation we may enumerate false hair, garments of
      any color except white, instruments of music, vases of gold or
      silver, downy pillows, (as Jacob reposed his head on a stone,)
      white bread, foreign wines, public salutations, the use of warm
      baths, and the practice of shaving the beard, which, according to
      the expression of Tertullian, is a lie against our own faces, and
      an impious attempt to improve the works of the Creator. 90 When
      Christianity was introduced among the rich and the polite, the
      observation of these singular laws was left, as it would be at
      present, to the few who were ambitious of superior sanctity. But
      it is always easy, as well as agreeable, for the inferior ranks
      of mankind to claim a merit from the contempt of that pomp and
      pleasure which fortune has placed beyond their reach. The virtue
      of the primitive Christians, like that of the first Romans, was
      very frequently guarded by poverty and ignorance.


      88 (return) [ Lactant. Institut. Divin. l. vi. c. 20, 21, 22.]


      89 (return) [ Consult a work of Clemens of Alexandria, entitled
      The Pædagogue, which contains the rudiments of ethics, as they
      were taught in the most celebrated of the Christian schools.]


      90 (return) [ Tertullian, de Spectaculis, c. 23. Clemens
      Alexandrin. Pædagog. l. iii. c. 8.]


      The chaste severity of the fathers, in whatever related to the
      commerce of the two sexes, flowed from the same principle; their
      abhorrence of every enjoyment which might gratify the sensual,
      and degrade the spiritual nature of man. It was their favorite
      opinion, that if Adam had preserved his obedience to the Creator,
      he would have lived forever in a state of virgin purity, and that
      some harmless mode of vegetation might have peopled paradise with
      a race of innocent and immortal beings. 91 The use of marriage
      was permitted only to his fallen posterity, as a necessary
      expedient to continue the human species, and as a restraint,
      however imperfect, on the natural licentiousness of desire. The
      hesitation of the orthodox casuists on this interesting subject,
      betrays the perplexity of men, unwilling to approve an
      institution which they were compelled to tolerate. 92 The
      enumeration of the very whimsical laws, which they most
      circumstantially imposed on the marriage-bed, would force a smile
      from the young and a blush from the fair. It was their unanimous
      sentiment that a first marriage was adequate to all the purposes
      of nature and of society. The sensual connection was refined into
      a resemblance of the mystic union of Christ with his church, and
      was pronounced to be indissoluble either by divorce or by death.
      The practice of second nuptials was branded with the name of a
      legal adultery; and the persons who were guilty of so scandalous
      an offence against Christian purity, were soon excluded from the
      honors, and even from the alms, of the church. 93 Since desire
      was imputed as a crime, and marriage was tolerated as a defect,
      it was consistent with the same principles to consider a state of
      celibacy as the nearest approach to the divine perfection. It was
      with the utmost difficulty that ancient Rome could support the
      institution of six vestals; 94 but the primitive church was
      filled with a number of persons of either sex, who had devoted
      themselves to the profession of perpetual chastity. 95 A few of
      these, among whom we may reckon the learned Origen, judged it the
      most prudent to disarm the tempter. 96 Some were insensible and
      some were invincible against the assaults of the flesh.
      Disdaining an ignominious flight, the virgins of the warm climate
      of Africa encountered the enemy in the closest engagement; they
      permitted priests and deacons to share their bed, and gloried
      amidst the flames in their unsullied purity. But insulted Nature
      sometimes vindicated her rights, and this new species of
      martyrdom served only to introduce a new scandal into the church.
      97 Among the Christian ascetics, however, (a name which they soon
      acquired from their painful exercise,) many, as they were less
      presumptuous, were probably more successful. The loss of sensual
      pleasure was supplied and compensated by spiritual pride. Even
      the multitude of Pagans were inclined to estimate the merit of
      the sacrifice by its apparent difficulty; and it was in the
      praise of these chaste spouses of Christ that the fathers have
      poured forth the troubled stream of their eloquence. 98 Such are
      the early traces of monastic principles and institutions, which,
      in a subsequent age, have counterbalanced all the temporal
      advantages of Christianity. 99


      91 (return) [ Beausobro, Hist. Critique du Manicheisme, l. vii.
      c. 3. Justin, Gregory of Nyssa, Augustin, &c., strongly incline
      to this opinion. Note: But these were Gnostic or Manichean
      opinions. Beausobre distinctly describes Autustine’s bias to his
      recent escape from Manicheism; and adds that he afterwards
      changed his views.—M.]


      92 (return) [ Some of the Gnostic heretics were more consistent;
      they rejected the use of marriage.]


      93 (return) [ See a chain of tradition, from Justin Martyr to
      Jerome, in the Morale des Peres, c. iv. 6—26.]


      94 (return) [ See a very curious Dissertation on the Vestals, in
      the Memoires de l’Academie des Inscriptions, tom. iv. p. 161—227.
      Notwithstanding the honors and rewards which were bestowed on
      those virgins, it was difficult to procure a sufficient number;
      nor could the dread of the most horrible death always restrain
      their incontinence.]


      95 (return) [ Cupiditatem procreandi aut unam scimus aut nullam.
      Minutius Fælix, c. 31. Justin. Apolog. Major. Athenagoras in
      Legat. c 28. Tertullian de Cultu Foemin. l. ii.]


      96 (return) [ Eusebius, l. vi. 8. Before the fame of Origen had
      excited envy and persecution, this extraordinary action was
      rather admired than censured. As it was his general practice to
      allegorize Scripture, it seems unfortunate that in this instance
      only, he should have adopted the literal sense.]


      97 (return) [ Cyprian. Epist. 4, and Dodwell, Dissertat.
      Cyprianic. iii. Something like this rash attempt was long
      afterwards imputed to the founder of the order of Fontevrault.
      Bayle has amused himself and his readers on that very delicate
      subject.]


      98 (return) [ Dupin (Bibliotheque Ecclesiastique, tom. i. p. 195)
      gives a particular account of the dialogue of the ten virgins, as
      it was composed by Methodius, Bishop of Tyre. The praises of
      virginity are excessive.]


      99 (return) [ The Ascetics (as early as the second century) made
      a public profession of mortifying their bodies, and of abstaining
      from the use of flesh and wine. Mosheim, p. 310.]


      The Christians were not less averse to the business than to the
      pleasures of this world. The defence of our persons and property
      they knew not how to reconcile with the patient doctrine which
      enjoined an unlimited forgiveness of past injuries, and commanded
      them to invite the repetition of fresh insults. Their simplicity
      was offended by the use of oaths, by the pomp of magistracy, and
      by the active contention of public life; nor could their humane
      ignorance be convinced that it was lawful on any occasion to shed
      the blood of our fellow-creatures, either by the sword of
      justice, or by that of war; even though their criminal or hostile
      attempts should threaten the peace and safety of the whole
      community. 100 It was acknowledged that, under a less perfect
      law, the powers of the Jewish constitution had been exercised,
      with the approbation of heaven, by inspired prophets and by
      anointed kings. The Christians felt and confessed that such
      institutions might be necessary for the present system of the
      world, and they cheerfully submitted to the authority of their
      Pagan governors. But while they inculcated the maxims of passive
      obedience, they refused to take any active part in the civil
      administration or the military defence of the empire. Some
      indulgence might, perhaps, be allowed to those persons who,
      before their conversion, were already engaged in such violent and
      sanguinary occupations; 101a but it was impossible that the
      Christians, without renouncing a more sacred duty, could assume
      the character of soldiers, of magistrates, or of princes. 102b
      This indolent, or even criminal disregard to the public welfare,
      exposed them to the contempt and reproaches of the Pagans, who
      very frequently asked, what must be the fate of the empire,
      attacked on every side by the barbarians, if all mankind should
      adopt the pusillanimous sentiments of the new sect. 103 To this
      insulting question the Christian apologists returned obscure and
      ambiguous answers, as they were unwilling to reveal the secret
      cause of their security; the expectation that, before the
      conversion of mankind was accomplished, war, government, the
      Roman empire, and the world itself, would be no more. It may be
      observed, that, in this instance likewise, the situation of the
      first Christians coincided very happily with their religious
      scruples, and that their aversion to an active life contributed
      rather to excuse them from the service, than to exclude them from
      the honors, of the state and army.


      100 (return) [ See the Morale des Peres. The same patient
      principles have been revived since the Reformation by the
      Socinians, the modern Anabaptists, and the Quakers. Barclay, the
      Apologist of the Quakers, has protected his brethren by the
      authority of the primitive Christian; p. 542-549]


      101a (return) [ Tertullian, Apolog. c. 21. De Idololatria, c. 17,
      18. Origen contra Celsum, l. v. p. 253, l. vii. p. 348, l. viii.
      p. 423-428.]


      102b (return) [ Tertullian (de Corona Militis, c. 11) suggested
      to them the expedient of deserting; a counsel which, if it had
      been generally known, was not very proper to conciliate the favor
      of the emperors towards the Christian sect. * Note: There is
      nothing which ought to astonish us in the refusal of the
      primitive Christians to take part in public affairs; it was the
      natural consequence of the contrariety of their principles to the
      customs, laws, and active life of the Pagan world. As Christians,
      they could not enter into the senate, which, according to Gibbon
      himself, always assembled in a temple or consecrated place, and
      where each senator, before he took his seat, made a libation of a
      few drops of wine, and burnt incense on the altar; as Christians,
      they could not assist at festivals and banquets, which always
      terminated with libations, &c.; finally, as “the innumerable
      deities and rites of polytheism were closely interwoven with
      every circumstance of public and private life,” the Christians
      could not participate in them without incurring, according to
      their principles, the guilt of impiety. It was then much less by
      an effect of their doctrine, than by the consequence of their
      situation, that they stood aloof from public business. Whenever
      this situation offered no impediment, they showed as much
      activity as the Pagans. Proinde, says Justin Martyr, (Apol. c.
      17,) nos solum Deum adoramus, et vobis in rebus aliis læti
      inservimus.—G. ——-This latter passage, M. Guizot quotes in Latin;
      if he had consulted the original, he would have found it to be
      altogether irrelevant: it merely relates to the payment of
      taxes.—M. — —Tertullian does not suggest to the soldiers the
      expedient of deserting; he says that they ought to be constantly
      on their guard to do nothing during their service contrary to the
      law of God, and to resolve to suffer martyrdom rather than submit
      to a base compliance, or openly to renounce the service. (De Cor.
      Mil. ii. p. 127.) He does not positively decide that the military
      service is not permitted to Christians; he ends, indeed, by
      saying, Puta denique licere militiam usque ad causam coronæ.—G.
      ——M. Guizot is. I think, again unfortunate in his defence of
      Tertullian. That father says, that many Christian soldiers had
      deserted, aut deserendum statim sit, ut a multis actum. The
      latter sentence, Puta, &c, &c., is a concession for the sake of
      argument: wha follows is more to the purpose.—M. Many other
      passages of Tertullian prove that the army was full of
      Christians, Hesterni sumus et vestra omnia implevimus, urbes,
      insulas, castella, municipia, conciliabula, castra ipsa. (Apol.
      c. 37.) Navigamus et not vobiscum et militamus. (c. 42.) Origen,
      in truth, appears to have maintained a more rigid opinion, (Cont.
      Cels. l. viii.;) but he has often renounced this exaggerated
      severity, perhaps necessary to produce great results, and he
      speaks of the profession of arms as an honorable one. (l. iv. c.
      218.)— G. ——On these points Christian opinion, it should seem,
      was much divided Tertullian, when he wrote the De Cor. Mil., was
      evidently inclining to more ascetic opinions, and Origen was of
      the same class. See Neander, vol. l part ii. p. 305, edit.
      1828.—M.]


      103 (return) [ As well as we can judge from the mutilated
      representation of Origen, (1. viii. p. 423,) his adversary,
      Celsus, had urged his objection with great force and candor.]


      Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.—Part VI.


      V. But the human character, however it may be exalted or
      depressed by a temporary enthusiasm, will return by degrees to
      its proper and natural level, and will resume those passions that
      seem the most adapted to its present condition. The primitive
      Christians were dead to the business and pleasures of the world;
      but their love of action, which could never be entirely
      extinguished, soon revived, and found a new occupation in the
      government of the church. A separate society, which attacked the
      established religion of the empire, was obliged to adopt some
      form of internal policy, and to appoint a sufficient number of
      ministers, intrusted not only with the spiritual functions, but
      even with the temporal direction of the Christian commonwealth.
      The safety of that society, its honor, its aggrandizement, were
      productive, even in the most pious minds, of a spirit of
      patriotism, such as the first of the Romans had felt for the
      republic, and sometimes of a similar indifference, in the use of
      whatever means might probably conduce to so desirable an end. The
      ambition of raising themselves or their friends to the honors and
      offices of the church, was disguised by the laudable intention of
      devoting to the public benefit the power and consideration,
      which, for that purpose only, it became their duty to solicit. In
      the exercise of their functions, they were frequently called upon
      to detect the errors of heresy or the arts of faction, to oppose
      the designs of perfidious brethren, to stigmatize their
      characters with deserved infamy, and to expel them from the bosom
      of a society whose peace and happiness they had attempted to
      disturb. The ecclesiastical governors of the Christians were
      taught to unite the wisdom of the serpent with the innocence of
      the dove; but as the former was refined, so the latter was
      insensibly corrupted, by the habits of government. In the church
      as well as in the world, the persons who were placed in any
      public station rendered themselves considerable by their
      eloquence and firmness, by their knowledge of mankind, and by
      their dexterity in business; and while they concealed from
      others, and perhaps from themselves, the secret motives of their
      conduct, they too frequently relapsed into all the turbulent
      passions of active life, which were tinctured with an additional
      degree of bitterness and obstinacy from the infusion of spiritual
      zeal.


      The government of the church has often been the subject, as well
      as the prize, of religious contention. The hostile disputants of
      Rome, of Paris, of Oxford, and of Geneva, have alike struggled to
      reduce the primitive and apostolic model 1041 to the respective
      standards of their own policy. The few who have pursued this
      inquiry with more candor and impartiality, are of opinion, 105
      that the apostles declined the office of legislation, and rather
      chose to endure some partial scandals and divisions, than to
      exclude the Christians of a future age from the liberty of
      varying their forms of ecclesiastical government according to the
      changes of times and circumstances. The scheme of policy, which,
      under their approbation, was adopted for the use of the first
      century, may be discovered from the practice of Jerusalem, of
      Ephesus, or of Corinth. The societies which were instituted in
      the cities of the Roman empire were united only by the ties of
      faith and charity. Independence and equality formed the basis of
      their internal constitution. The want of discipline and human
      learning was supplied by the occasional assistance of the
      _prophets_, 106 who were called to that function without
      distinction of age, of sex, 1061 or of natural abilities, and
      who, as often as they felt the divine impulse, poured forth the
      effusions of the Spirit in the assembly of the faithful. But
      these extraordinary gifts were frequently abused or misapplied by
      the prophetic teachers. They displayed them at an improper
      season, presumptuously disturbed the service of the assembly,
      and, by their pride or mistaken zeal, they introduced,
      particularly into the apostolic church of Corinth, a long and
      melancholy train of disorders. 107 As the institution of prophets
      became useless, and even pernicious, their powers were withdrawn,
      and their office abolished. The public functions of religion were
      solely intrusted to the established ministers of the church, the
      _bishops_ and the _presbyters;_ two appellations which, in their
      first origin, appear to have distinguished the same office and
      the same order of persons. The name of Presbyter was expressive
      of their age, or rather of their gravity and wisdom. The title of
      Bishop denoted their inspection over the faith and manners of the
      Christians who were committed to their pastoral care. In
      proportion to the respective numbers of the faithful, a larger or
      smaller number of these _episcopal presbyters_ guided each infant
      congregation with equal authority and with united counsels. 108


      1041 (return) [ The aristocratical party in France, as well as in
      England, has strenuously maintained the divine origin of bishops.
      But the Calvinistical presbyters were impatient of a superior;
      and the Roman Pontiff refused to acknowledge an equal. See Fra
      Paolo.]


      105 (return) [ In the history of the Christian hierarchy, I have,
      for the most part, followed the learned and candid Mosheim.]


      106 (return) [ For the prophets of the primitive church, see
      Mosheim, Dissertationes ad Hist. Eccles. pertinentes, tom. ii. p.
      132—208.]


      1061 (return) [ St. Paul distinctly reproves the intrusion of
      females into the prophets office. 1 Cor. xiv. 34, 35. 1 Tim. ii.
      11.—M.]


      107 (return) [ See the epistles of St. Paul, and of Clemens, to
      the Corinthians. * Note: The first ministers established in the
      church were the deacons, appointed at Jerusalem, seven in number;
      they were charged with the distribution of the alms; even females
      had a share in this employment. After the deacons came the elders
      or priests, charged with the maintenance of order and decorum in
      the community, and to act every where in its name. The bishops
      were afterwards charged to watch over the faith and the
      instruction of the disciples: the apostles themselves appointed
      several bishops. Tertullian, (adv. Marium, c. v.,) Clement of
      Alexandria, and many fathers of the second and third century, do
      not permit us to doubt this fact. The equality of rank between
      these different functionaries did not prevent their functions
      being, even in their origin, distinct; they became subsequently
      still more so. See Plank, Geschichte der Christ. Kirch.
      Verfassung., vol. i. p. 24.—G. On this extremely obscure subject,
      which has been so much perplexed by passion and interest, it is
      impossible to justify any opinion without entering into long and
      controversial details.——It must be admitted, in opposition to
      Plank, that in the New Testament, several words are sometimes
      indiscriminately used. (Acts xx. v. 17, comp. with 28 Tit. i. 5
      and 7. Philip. i. 1.) But it is as clear, that as soon as we can
      discern the form of church government, at a period closely
      bordering upon, if not within, the apostolic age, it appears with
      a bishop at the head of each community, holding some superiority
      over the presbyters. Whether he was, as Gibbon from Mosheim
      supposes, merely an elective head of the College of Presbyters,
      (for this we have, in fact, no valid authority,) or whether his
      distinct functions were established on apostolic authority, is
      still contested. The universal submission to this episcopacy, in
      every part of the Christian world appears to me strongly to favor
      the latter view.—M.]


      108 (return) [ Hooker’s Ecclesiastical Polity, l. vii.]


      But the most perfect equality of freedom requires the directing
      hand of a superior magistrate: and the order of public
      deliberations soon introduces the office of a president, invested
      at least with the authority of collecting the sentiments, and of
      executing the resolutions, of the assembly. A regard for the
      public tranquillity, which would so frequently have been
      interrupted by annual or by occasional elections, induced the
      primitive Christians to constitute an honorable and perpetual
      magistracy, and to choose one of the wisest and most holy among
      their presbyters to execute, during his life, the duties of their
      ecclesiastical governor. It was under these circumstances that
      the lofty title of Bishop began to raise itself above the humble
      appellation of Presbyter; and while the latter remained the most
      natural distinction for the members of every Christian senate,
      the former was appropriated to the dignity of its new president.
      109 The advantages of this episcopal form of government, which
      appears to have been introduced before the end of the first
      century, 110 were so obvious, and so important for the future
      greatness, as well as the present peace, of Christianity, that it
      was adopted without delay by all the societies which were already
      scattered over the empire, had acquired in a very early period
      the sanction of antiquity, 111 and is still revered by the most
      powerful churches, both of the East and of the West, as a
      primitive and even as a divine establishment. 112 It is needless
      to observe, that the pious and humble presbyters, who were first
      dignified with the episcopal title, could not possess, and would
      probably have rejected, the power and pomp which now encircles
      the tiara of the Roman pontiff, or the mitre of a German prelate.
      But we may define, in a few words, the narrow limits of their
      original jurisdiction, which was chiefly of a spiritual, though
      in some instances of a temporal nature. 113 It consisted in the
      administration of the sacraments and discipline of the church,
      the superintendency of religious ceremonies, which imperceptibly
      increased in number and variety, the consecration of
      ecclesiastical ministers, to whom the bishop assigned their
      respective functions, the management of the public fund, and the
      determination of all such differences as the faithful were
      unwilling to expose before the tribunal of an idolatrous judge.
      These powers, during a short period, were exercised according to
      the advice of the presbyteral college, and with the consent and
      approbation of the assembly of Christians. The primitive bishops
      were considered only as the first of their equals, and the
      honorable servants of a free people. Whenever the episcopal chair
      became vacant by death, a new president was chosen among the
      presbyters by the suffrage of the whole congregation, every
      member of which supposed himself invested with a sacred and
      sacerdotal character. 114


      109 (return) [ See Jerome and Titum, c. i. and Epistol. 85, (in
      the Benedictine edition, 101,) and the elaborate apology of
      Blondel, pro sententia Hieronymi. The ancient state, as it is
      described by Jerome, of the bishop and presbyters of Alexandria,
      receives a remarkable confirmation from the patriarch Eutychius,
      (Annal. tom. i. p. 330, Vers Pocock;) whose testimony I know not
      how to reject, in spite of all the objections of the learned
      Pearson in his Vindiciæ Ignatianæ, part i. c. 11.]


      110 (return) [ See the introduction to the Apocalypse. Bishops,
      under the name of angels, were already instituted in the seven
      cities of Asia. And yet the epistle of Clemens (which is probably
      of as ancient a date) does not lead us to discover any traces of
      episcopacy either at Corinth or Rome.]


      111 (return) [ Nulla Ecclesia sine Episcopo, has been a fact as
      well as a maxim since the time of Tertullian and Irenæus.]


      112 (return) [ After we have passed the difficulties of the first
      century, we find the episcopal government universally
      established, till it was interrupted by the republican genius of
      the Swiss and German reformers.]


      113 (return) [ See Mosheim in the first and second centuries.
      Ignatius (ad Smyrnæos, c. 3, &c.) is fond of exalting the
      episcopal dignity. Le Clerc (Hist. Eccles. p. 569) very bluntly
      censures his conduct, Mosheim, with a more critical judgment, (p.
      161,) suspects the purity even of the smaller epistles.]


      114 (return) [ Nonne et Laici sacerdotes sumus? Tertullian,
      Exhort. ad Castitat. c. 7. As the human heart is still the same,
      several of the observations which Mr. Hume has made on
      Enthusiasm, (Essays, vol. i. p. 76, quarto edit.) may be applied
      even to real inspiration. * Note: This expression was employed by
      the earlier Christian writers in the sense used by St. Peter, 1
      Ep ii. 9. It was the sanctity and virtue not the power of
      priesthood, in which all Christians were to be equally
      distinguished.—M.]


      Such was the mild and equal constitution by which the Christians
      were governed more than a hundred years after the death of the
      apostles. Every society formed within itself a separate and
      independent republic; and although the most distant of these
      little states maintained a mutual as well as friendly intercourse
      of letters and deputations, the Christian world was not yet
      connected by any supreme authority or legislative assembly. As
      the numbers of the faithful were gradually multiplied, they
      discovered the advantages that might result from a closer union
      of their interest and designs. Towards the end of the second
      century, the churches of Greece and Asia adopted the useful
      institutions of provincial synods, 1141 and they may justly be
      supposed to have borrowed the model of a representative council
      from the celebrated examples of their own country, the
      Amphictyons, the Achæan league, or the assemblies of the Ionian
      cities. It was soon established as a custom and as a law, that
      the bishops of the independent churches should meet in the
      capital of the province at the stated periods of spring and
      autumn. Their deliberations were assisted by the advice of a few
      distinguished presbyters, and moderated by the presence of a
      listening multitude. 115 Their decrees, which were styled Canons,
      regulated every important controversy of faith and discipline;
      and it was natural to believe that a liberal effusion of the Holy
      Spirit would be poured on the united assembly of the delegates of
      the Christian people. The institution of synods was so well
      suited to private ambition, and to public interest, that in the
      space of a few years it was received throughout the whole empire.
      A regular correspondence was established between the provincial
      councils, which mutually communicated and approved their
      respective proceedings; and the catholic church soon assumed the
      form, and acquired the strength, of a great fœderative republic.
      116


      1141 (return) [ The synods were not the first means taken by the
      insulated churches to enter into communion and to assume a
      corporate character. The dioceses were first formed by the union
      of several country churches with a church in a city: many
      churches in one city uniting among themselves, or joining a more
      considerable church, became metropolitan. The dioceses were not
      formed before the beginning of the second century: before that
      time the Christians had not established sufficient churches in
      the country to stand in need of that union. It is towards the
      middle of the same century that we discover the first traces of
      the metropolitan constitution. (Probably the country churches
      were founded in general by missionaries from those in the city,
      and would preserve a natural connection with the parent
      church.)—M. ——The provincial synods did not commence till towards
      the middle of the third century, and were not the first synods.
      History gives us distinct notions of the synods, held towards the
      end of the second century, at Ephesus at Jerusalem, at Pontus,
      and at Rome, to put an end to the disputes which had arisen
      between the Latin and Asiatic churches about the celebration of
      Easter. But these synods were not subject to any regular form or
      periodical return; this regularity was first established with the
      provincial synods, which were formed by a union of the bishops of
      a district, subject to a metropolitan. Plank, p. 90. Geschichte
      der Christ. Kirch. Verfassung—G]


      115 (return) [ Acta Concil. Carthag. apud Cyprian. edit. Fell, p.
      158. This council was composed of eighty-seven bishops from the
      provinces of Mauritania, Numidia, and Africa; some presbyters and
      deacons assisted at the assembly; præsente plebis maxima parte.]


      116 (return) [ Aguntur præterea per Græcias illas, certis in
      locis concilia, &c Tertullian de Jejuniis, c. 13. The African
      mentions it as a recent and foreign institution. The coalition of
      the Christian churches is very ably explained by Mosheim, p. 164
      170.]


      As the legislative authority of the particular churches was
      insensibly superseded by the use of councils, the bishops
      obtained by their alliance a much larger share of executive and
      arbitrary power; and as soon as they were connected by a sense of
      their common interest, they were enabled to attack, with united
      vigor, the original rights of their clergy and people. The
      prelates of the third century imperceptibly changed the language
      of exhortation into that of command, scattered the seeds of
      future usurpations, and supplied, by scripture allegories and
      declamatory rhetoric, their deficiency of force and of reason.
      They exalted the unity and power of the church, as it was
      represented in the episcopal office, of which every bishop
      enjoyed an equal and undivided portion. 117 Princes and
      magistrates, it was often repeated, might boast an earthly claim
      to a transitory dominion; it was the episcopal authority alone
      which was derived from the Deity, and extended itself over this
      and over another world. The bishops were the vicegerents of
      Christ, the successors of the apostles, and the mystic
      substitutes of the high priest of the Mosaic law. Their exclusive
      privilege of conferring the sacerdotal character invaded the
      freedom both of clerical and of popular elections; and if, in the
      administration of the church, they still consulted the judgment
      of the presbyters, or the inclination of the people, they most
      carefully inculcated the merit of such a voluntary condescension.
      The bishops acknowledged the supreme authority which resided in
      the assembly of their brethren; but in the government of his
      peculiar diocese, each of them exacted from his _flock_ the same
      implicit obedience as if that favorite metaphor had been
      literally just, and as if the shepherd had been of a more exalted
      nature than that of his sheep. 118 This obedience, however, was
      not imposed without some efforts on one side, and some resistance
      on the other. The democratical part of the constitution was, in
      many places, very warmly supported by the zealous or interested
      opposition of the inferior clergy. But their patriotism received
      the ignominious epithets of faction and schism; and the episcopal
      cause was indebted for its rapid progress to the labors of many
      active prelates, who, like Cyprian of Carthage, could reconcile
      the arts of the most ambitious statesman with the Christian
      virtues which seem adapted to the character of a saint and
      martyr. 119


      117 (return) [ Cyprian, in his admired treatise De Unitate
      Ecclesiæ. p. 75—86]


      118 (return) [ We may appeal to the whole tenor of Cyprian’s
      conduct, of his doctrine, and of his epistles. Le Clerc, in a
      short life of Cyprian, (Bibliotheque Universelle, tom. xii. p.
      207—378,) has laid him open with great freedom and accuracy.]


      119 (return) [ If Novatus, Felicissimus, &c., whom the Bishop of
      Carthage expelled from his church, and from Africa, were not the
      most detestable monsters of wickedness, the zeal of Cyprian must
      occasionally have prevailed over his veracity. For a very just
      account of these obscure quarrels, see Mosheim, p. 497—512.]


      The same causes which at first had destroyed the equality of the
      presbyters introduced among the bishops a preeminence of rank,
      and from thence a superiority of jurisdiction. As often as in the
      spring and autumn they met in provincial synod, the difference of
      personal merit and reputation was very sensibly felt among the
      members of the assembly, and the multitude was governed by the
      wisdom and eloquence of the few. But the order of public
      proceedings required a more regular and less invidious
      distinction; the office of perpetual presidents in the councils
      of each province was conferred on the bishops of the principal
      city; and these aspiring prelates, who soon acquired the lofty
      titles of Metropolitans and Primates, secretly prepared
      themselves to usurp over their episcopal brethren the same
      authority which the bishops had so lately assumed above the
      college of presbyters. 120 Nor was it long before an emulation of
      preeminence and power prevailed among the Metropolitans
      themselves, each of them affecting to display, in the most
      pompous terms, the temporal honors and advantages of the city
      over which he presided; the numbers and opulence of the
      Christians who were subject to their pastoral care; the saints
      and martyrs who had arisen among them; and the purity with which
      they preserved the tradition of the faith, as it had been
      transmitted through a series of orthodox bishops from the apostle
      or the apostolic disciple, to whom the foundation of their church
      was ascribed. 121 From every cause, either of a civil or of an
      ecclesiastical nature, it was easy to foresee that Rome must
      enjoy the respect, and would soon claim the obedience, of the
      provinces. The society of the faithful bore a just proportion to
      the capital of the empire; and the Roman church was the greatest,
      the most numerous, and, in regard to the West, the most ancient
      of all the Christian establishments, many of which had received
      their religion from the pious labors of her missionaries. Instead
      of one apostolic founder, the utmost boast of Antioch, of
      Ephesus, or of Corinth, the banks of the Tyber were supposed to
      have been honored with the preaching and martyrdom of the two
      most eminent among the apostles; 122 and the bishops of Rome very
      prudently claimed the inheritance of whatsoever prerogatives were
      attributed either to the person or to the office of St. Peter.
      123 The bishops of Italy and of the provinces were disposed to
      allow them a primacy of order and association (such was their
      very accurate expression) in the Christian aristocracy. 124 But
      the power of a monarch was rejected with abhorrence, and the
      aspiring genius of Rome experienced from the nations of Asia and
      Africa a more vigorous resistance to her spiritual, than she had
      formerly done to her temporal, dominion. The patriotic Cyprian,
      who ruled with the most absolute sway the church of Carthage and
      the provincial synods, opposed with resolution and success the
      ambition of the Roman pontiff, artfully connected his own cause
      with that of the eastern bishops, and, like Hannibal, sought out
      new allies in the heart of Asia. 125 If this Punic war was
      carried on without any effusion of blood, it was owing much less
      to the moderation than to the weakness of the contending
      prelates. Invectives and excommunications were _their_ only
      weapons; and these, during the progress of the whole controversy,
      they hurled against each other with equal fury and devotion. The
      hard necessity of censuring either a pope, or a saint and martyr,
      distresses the modern Catholics whenever they are obliged to
      relate the particulars of a dispute in which the champions of
      religion indulged such passions as seem much more adapted to the
      senate or to the camp. 126


      120 (return) [ Mosheim, p. 269, 574. Dupin, Antiquæ Eccles.
      Disciplin. p. 19, 20.]


      121 (return) [ Tertullian, in a distinct treatise, has pleaded
      against the heretics the right of prescription, as it was held by
      the apostolic churches.]


      122 (return) [ The journey of St. Peter to Rome is mentioned by
      most of the ancients, (see Eusebius, ii. 25,) maintained by all
      the Catholics, allowed by some Protestants, (see Pearson and
      Dodwell de Success. Episcop. Roman,) but has been vigorously
      attacked by Spanheim, (Miscellanes Sacra, iii. 3.) According to
      Father Hardouin, the monks of the thirteenth century, who
      composed the Æneid, represented St. Peter under the allegorical
      character of the Trojan hero. * Note: It is quite clear that,
      strictly speaking, the church of Rome was not founded by either
      of these apostles. St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans proves
      undeniably the flourishing state of the church before his visit
      to the city; and many Roman Catholic writers have given up the
      impracticable task of reconciling with chronology any visit of
      St. Peter to Rome before the end of the reign of Claudius, or the
      beginning of that of Nero.—M.]


      123 (return) [ It is in French only that the famous allusion to
      St. Peter’s name is exact. Tu es Pierre, et sur cette pierre.—The
      same is imperfect in Greek, Latin, Italian, &c., and totally
      unintelligible in our Tentonic languages. * Note: It is exact in
      Syro-Chaldaic, the language in which it was spoken by Jesus
      Christ. (St. Matt. xvi. 17.) Peter was called Cephas; and cepha
      signifies base, foundation, rock—G.]


      124 (return) [ Irenæus adv. Hæreses, iii. 3. Tertullian de
      Præscription. c. 36, and Cyprian, Epistol. 27, 55, 71, 75. Le
      Clere (Hist. Eccles. p. 764) and Mosheim (p. 258, 578) labor in
      the interpretation of these passages. But the loose and
      rhetorical style of the fathers often appears favorable to the
      pretensions of Rome.]


      125 (return) [ See the sharp epistle from Firmilianus, bishop of
      Cæsarea, to Stephen, bishop of Rome, ap. Cyprian, Epistol. 75.]


      126 (return) [ Concerning this dispute of the rebaptism of
      heretics, see the epistles of Cyprian, and the seventh book of
      Eusebius.]


      The progress of the ecclesiastical authority gave birth to the
      memorable distinction of the laity and of the clergy, which had
      been unknown to the Greeks and Romans. 127 The former of these
      appellations comprehended the body of the Christian people; the
      latter, according to the signification of the word, was
      appropriated to the chosen portion that had been set apart for
      the service of religion; a celebrated order of men, which has
      furnished the most important, though not always the most
      edifying, subjects for modern history. Their mutual hostilities
      sometimes disturbed the peace of the infant church, but their
      zeal and activity were united in the common cause, and the love
      of power, which (under the most artful disguises) could insinuate
      itself into the breasts of bishops and martyrs, animated them to
      increase the number of their subjects, and to enlarge the limits
      of the Christian empire. They were destitute of any temporal
      force, and they were for a long time discouraged and oppressed,
      rather than assisted, by the civil magistrate; but they had
      acquired, and they employed within their own society, the two
      most efficacious instruments of government, rewards and
      punishments; the former derived from the pious liberality, the
      latter from the devout apprehensions, of the faithful.


      127 (return) [ For the origin of these words, see Mosheim, p.
      141. Spanheim, Hist. Ecclesiast. p. 633. The distinction of
      Clerus and Iaicus was established before the time of Tertullian.]


      Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.—Part VII


      I. The community of goods, which had so agreeably amused the
      imagination of Plato, 128 and which subsisted in some degree
      among the austere sect of the Essenians, 129 was adopted for a
      short time in the primitive church. The fervor of the first
      proselytes prompted them to sell those worldly possessions, which
      they despised, to lay the price of them at the feet of the
      apostles, and to content themselves with receiving an equal share
      out of the general distribution. 130 The progress of the
      Christian religion relaxed, and gradually abolished, this
      generous institution, which, in hands less pure than those of the
      apostles, would too soon have been corrupted and abused by the
      returning selfishness of human nature; and the converts who
      embraced the new religion were permitted to retain the possession
      of their patrimony, to receive legacies and inheritances, and to
      increase their separate property by all the lawful means of trade
      and industry. Instead of an absolute sacrifice, a moderate
      proportion was accepted by the ministers of the gospel; and in
      their weekly or monthly assemblies, every believer, according to
      the exigency of the occasion, and the measure of his wealth and
      piety, presented his voluntary offering for the use of the common
      fund. 131 Nothing, however inconsiderable, was refused; but it
      was diligently inculcated that, in the article of Tithes, the
      Mosaic law was still of divine obligation; and that since the
      Jews, under a less perfect discipline, had been commanded to pay
      a tenth part of all that they possessed, it would become the
      disciples of Christ to distinguish themselves by a superior
      degree of liberality, 132 and to acquire some merit by resigning
      a superfluous treasure, which must so soon be annihilated with
      the world itself. 133 It is almost unnecessary to observe, that
      the revenue of each particular church, which was of so uncertain
      and fluctuating a nature, must have varied with the poverty or
      the opulence of the faithful, as they were dispersed in obscure
      villages, or collected in the great cities of the empire. In the
      time of the emperor Decius, it was the opinion of the
      magistrates, that the Christians of Rome were possessed of very
      considerable wealth; that vessels of gold and silver were used in
      their religious worship, and that many among their proselytes had
      sold their lands and houses to increase the public riches of the
      sect, at the expense, indeed, of their unfortunate children, who
      found themselves beggars, because their parents had been saints.
      134 We should listen with distrust to the suspicions of strangers
      and enemies: on this occasion, however, they receive a very
      specious and probable color from the two following circumstances,
      the only ones that have reached our knowledge, which define any
      precise sums, or convey any distinct idea. Almost at the same
      period, the bishop of Carthage, from a society less opulent than
      that of Rome, collected a hundred thousand sesterces, (above
      eight hundred and fifty pounds sterling,) on a sudden call of
      charity to redeem the brethren of Numidia, who had been carried
      away captives by the barbarians of the desert. 135 About a
      hundred years before the reign of Decius, the Roman church had
      received, in a single donation, the sum of two hundred thousand
      sesterces from a stranger of Pontus, who proposed to fix his
      residence in the capital. 136 These oblations, for the most part,
      were made in money; nor was the society of Christians either
      desirous or capable of acquiring, to any considerable degree, the
      encumbrance of landed property. It had been provided by several
      laws, which were enacted with the same design as our statutes of
      mortmain, that no real estates should be given or bequeathed to
      any corporate body, without either a special privilege or a
      particular dispensation from the emperor or from the senate; 137
      who were seldom disposed to grant them in favor of a sect, at
      first the object of their contempt, and at last of their fears
      and jealousy. A transaction, however, is related under the reign
      of Alexander Severus, which discovers that the restraint was
      sometimes eluded or suspended, and that the Christians were
      permitted to claim and to possess lands within the limits of Rome
      itself. 138 The progress of Christianity, and the civil confusion
      of the empire, contributed to relax the severity of the laws; and
      before the close of the third century many considerable estates
      were bestowed on the opulent churches of Rome, Milan, Carthage,
      Antioch, Alexandria, and the other great cities of Italy and the
      provinces.


      128 (return) [ The community instituted by Plato is more perfect
      than that which Sir Thomas More had imagined for his Utopia. The
      community of women, and that of temporal goods, may be considered
      as inseparable parts of the same system.]


      129 (return) [ Joseph. Antiquitat. xviii. 2. Philo, de Vit.
      Contemplativ.]


      130 (return) [ See the Acts of the Apostles, c. 2, 4, 5, with
      Grotius’s Commentary. Mosheim, in a particular dissertation,
      attacks the common opinion with very inconclusive arguments. *
      Note: This is not the general judgment on Mosheim’s learned
      dissertation. There is no trace in the latter part of the New
      Testament of this community of goods, and many distinct proofs of
      the contrary. All exhortations to almsgiving would have been
      unmeaning if property had been in common—M.]


      131 (return) [ Justin Martyr, Apolog. Major, c. 89. Tertullian,
      Apolog. c. 39.]


      132 (return) [ Irenæus ad Hæres. l. iv. c. 27, 34. Origen in Num.
      Hom. ii Cyprian de Unitat. Eccles. Constitut. Apostol. l. ii. c.
      34, 35, with the notes of Cotelerius. The Constitutions introduce
      this divine precept, by declaring that priests are as much above
      kings as the soul is above the body. Among the tithable articles,
      they enumerate corn, wine, oil, and wool. On this interesting
      subject, consult Prideaux’s History of Tithes, and Fra Paolo
      delle Materie Beneficiarie; two writers of a very different
      character.]


      133 (return) [ The same opinion which prevailed about the year
      one thousand, was productive of the same effects. Most of the
      Donations express their motive, “appropinquante mundi fine.” See
      Mosheim’s General History of the Church, vol. i. p. 457.]


      134 (return) [ Tum summa cura est fratribus (Ut sermo testatur
      loquax.) Offerre, fundis venditis Sestertiorum millia. Addicta
      avorum prædia Foedis sub auctionibus, Successor exheres gemit
      Sanctis egens Parentibus. Hæc occuluntur abditis Ecclesiarum in
      angulis. Et summa pietas creditur Nudare dulces
      liberos.——Prudent. Hymn 2. The subsequent conduct of the deacon
      Laurence only proves how proper a use was made of the wealth of
      the Roman church; it was undoubtedly very considerable; but Fra
      Paolo (c. 3) appears to exaggerate, when he supposes that the
      successors of Commodus were urged to persecute the Christians by
      their own avarice, or that of their Prætorian præfects.]


      135 (return) [ Cyprian, Epistol. 62.]


      136 (return) [ Tertullian de Præscriptione, c. 30.]


      137 (return) [ Diocletian gave a rescript, which is only a
      declaration of the old law; “Collegium, si nullo speciali
      privilegio subnixum sit, hæreditatem capere non posse, dubium non
      est.” Fra Paolo (c. 4) thinks that these regulations had been
      much neglected since the reign of Valerian.]


      138 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 131. The ground had been public;
      and was row disputed between the society of Christians and that
      of butchers. Note *: Carponarii, rather victuallers.—M.]


      The bishop was the natural steward of the church; the public
      stock was intrusted to his care without account or control; the
      presbyters were confined to their spiritual functions, and the
      more dependent order of the deacons was solely employed in the
      management and distribution of the ecclesiastical revenue. 139 If
      we may give credit to the vehement declamations of Cyprian, there
      were too many among his African brethren, who, in the execution
      of their charge, violated every precept, not only of evangelical
      perfection, but even of moral virtue. By some of these unfaithful
      stewards the riches of the church were lavished in sensual
      pleasures; by others they were perverted to the purposes of
      private gain, of fraudulent purchases, and of rapacious usury.
      140 But as long as the contributions of the Christian people were
      free and unconstrained, the abuse of their confidence could not
      be very frequent, and the general uses to which their liberality
      was applied reflected honor on the religious society. A decent
      portion was reserved for the maintenance of the bishop and his
      clergy; a sufficient sum was allotted for the expenses of the
      public worship, of which the feasts of love, the _agapæ_, as they
      were called, constituted a very pleasing part. The whole
      remainder was the sacred patrimony of the poor. According to the
      discretion of the bishop, it was distributed to support widows
      and orphans, the lame, the sick, and the aged of the community;
      to comfort strangers and pilgrims, and to alleviate the
      misfortunes of prisoners and captives, more especially when their
      sufferings had been occasioned by their firm attachment to the
      cause of religion. 141 A generous intercourse of charity united
      the most distant provinces, and the smaller congregations were
      cheerfully assisted by the alms of their more opulent brethren.
      142 Such an institution, which paid less regard to the merit than
      to the distress of the object, very materially conduced to the
      progress of Christianity. The Pagans, who were actuated by a
      sense of humanity, while they derided the doctrines, acknowledged
      the benevolence, of the new sect. 143 The prospect of immediate
      relief and of future protection allured into its hospitable bosom
      many of those unhappy persons whom the neglect of the world would
      have abandoned to the miseries of want, of sickness, and of old
      age. There is some reason likewise to believe that great numbers
      of infants, who, according to the inhuman practice of the times,
      had been exposed by their parents, were frequently rescued from
      death, baptized, educated, and maintained by the piety of the
      Christians, and at the expense of the public treasure. 144


      139 (return) [ Constitut. Apostol. ii. 35.]


      140 (return) [ Cyprian de Lapsis, p. 89. Epistol. 65. The charge
      is confirmed by the 19th and 20th canon of the council of
      Illiberis.]


      141 (return) [ See the apologies of Justin, Tertullian, &c.]


      142 (return) [ The wealth and liberality of the Romans to their
      most distant brethren is gratefully celebrated by Dionysius of
      Corinth, ap. Euseb. l. iv. c. 23.]


      143 (return) [ See Lucian iu Peregrin. Julian (Epist. 49) seems
      mortified that the Christian charity maintains not only their
      own, but likewise the heathen poor.]


      144 (return) [ Such, at least, has been the laudable conduct of
      more modern missionaries, under the same circumstances. Above
      three thousand new-born infants are annually exposed in the
      streets of Pekin. See Le Comte, Memoires sur la Chine, and the
      Recherches sur les Chinois et les Egyptians, tom. i. p. 61.]


      II. It is the undoubted right of every society to exclude from
      its communion and benefits such among its members as reject or
      violate those regulations which have been established by general
      consent. In the exercise of this power, the censures of the
      Christian church were chiefly directed against scandalous
      sinners, and particularly those who were guilty of murder, of
      fraud, or of incontinence; against the authors or the followers
      of any heretical opinions which had been condemned by the
      judgment of the episcopal order; and against those unhappy
      persons, who, whether from choice or compulsion, had polluted
      themselves after their baptism by any act of idolatrous worship.
      The consequences of excommunication were of a temporal as well as
      a spiritual nature. The Christian against whom it was pronounced
      was deprived of any part in the oblations of the faithful. The
      ties both of religious and of private friendship were dissolved:
      he found himself a profane object of abhorrence to the persons
      whom he the most esteemed, or by whom he had been the most
      tenderly beloved; and as far as an expulsion from a respectable
      society could imprint on his character a mark of disgrace, he was
      shunned or suspected by the generality of mankind. The situation
      of these unfortunate exiles was in itself very painful and
      melancholy; but, as it usually happens, their apprehensions far
      exceeded their sufferings. The benefits of the Christian
      communion were those of eternal life; nor could they erase from
      their minds the awful opinion, that to those ecclesiastical
      governors by whom they were condemned, the Deity had committed
      the keys of Hell and of Paradise. The heretics, indeed, who might
      be supported by the consciousness of their intentions, and by the
      flattering hope that they alone had discovered the true path of
      salvation, endeavored to regain, in their separate assemblies,
      those comforts, temporal as well as spiritual, which they no
      longer derived from the great society of Christians. But almost
      all those who had reluctantly yielded to the power of vice or
      idolatry were sensible of their fallen condition, and anxiously
      desirous of being restored to the benefits of the Christian
      communion.


      With regard to the treatment of these penitents, two opposite
      opinions, the one of justice, the other of mercy, divided the
      primitive church. The more rigid and inflexible casuists refused
      them forever, and without exception, the meanest place in the
      holy community, which they had disgraced or deserted; and leaving
      them to the remorse of a guilty conscience, indulged them only
      with a faint ray of hope that the contrition of their life and
      death might possibly be accepted by the Supreme Being. 145 A
      milder sentiment was embraced, in practice as well as in theory,
      by the purest and most respectable of the Christian churches. 146
      The gates of reconciliation and of heaven were seldom shut
      against the returning penitent; but a severe and solemn form of
      discipline was instituted, which, while it served to expiate his
      crime, might powerfully deter the spectators from the imitation
      of his example. Humbled by a public confession, emaciated by
      fasting and clothed in sackcloth, the penitent lay prostrate at
      the door of the assembly, imploring with tears the pardon of his
      offences, and soliciting the prayers of the faithful. 147 If the
      fault was of a very heinous nature, whole years of penance were
      esteemed an inadequate satisfaction to the divine justice; and it
      was always by slow and painful gradations that the sinner, the
      heretic, or the apostate, was readmitted into the bosom of the
      church. A sentence of perpetual excommunication was, however,
      reserved for some crimes of an extraordinary magnitude, and
      particularly for the inexcusable relapses of those penitents who
      had already experienced and abused the clemency of their
      ecclesiastical superiors. According to the circumstances or the
      number of the guilty, the exercise of the Christian discipline
      was varied by the discretion of the bishops. The councils of
      Ancyra and Illiberis were held about the same time, the one in
      Galatia, the other in Spain; but their respective canons, which
      are still extant, seem to breathe a very different spirit. The
      Galatian, who after his baptism had repeatedly sacrificed to
      idols, might obtain his pardon by a penance of seven years; and
      if he had seduced others to imitate his example, only three years
      more were added to the term of his exile. But the unhappy
      Spaniard, who had committed the same offence, was deprived of the
      hope of reconciliation, even in the article of death; and his
      idolatry was placed at the head of a list of seventeen other
      crimes, against which a sentence no less terrible was pronounced.
      Among these we may distinguish the inexpiable guilt of
      calumniating a bishop, a presbyter, or even a deacon. 148


      145 (return) [ The Montanists and the Novatians, who adhered to
      this opinion with the greatest rigor and obstinacy, found
      themselves at last in the number of excommunicated heretics. See
      the learned and copious Mosheim, Secul. ii. and iii.]


      146 (return) [ Dionysius ap. Euseb. iv. 23. Cyprian, de Lapsis.]


      147 (return) [ Cave’s Primitive Christianity, part iii. c. 5. The
      admirers of antiquity regret the loss of this public penance.]


      148 (return) [ See in Dupin, Bibliotheque Ecclesiastique, tom.
      ii. p. 304—313, a short but rational exposition of the canons of
      those councils, which were assembled in the first moments of
      tranquillity, after the persecution of Diocletian. This
      persecution had been much less severely felt in Spain than in
      Galatia; a difference which may, in some measure account for the
      contrast of their regulations.]


      The well-tempered mixture of liberality and rigor, the judicious
      dispensation of rewards and punishments, according to the maxims
      of policy as well as justice, constituted the _human_ strength of
      the church. The Bishops, whose paternal care extended itself to
      the government of both worlds, were sensible of the importance of
      these prerogatives; and covering their ambition with the fair
      pretence of the love of order, they were jealous of any rival in
      the exercise of a discipline so necessary to prevent the
      desertion of those troops which had enlisted themselves under the
      banner of the cross, and whose numbers every day became more
      considerable. From the imperious declamations of Cyprian, we
      should naturally conclude that the doctrines of excommunication
      and penance formed the most essential part of religion; and that
      it was much less dangerous for the disciples of Christ to neglect
      the observance of the moral duties, than to despise the censures
      and authority of their bishops. Sometimes we might imagine that
      we were listening to the voice of Moses, when he commanded the
      earth to open, and to swallow up, in consuming flames, the
      rebellious race which refused obedience to the priesthood of
      Aaron; and we should sometimes suppose that we heard a Roman
      consul asserting the majesty of the republic, and declaring his
      inflexible resolution to enforce the rigor of the laws. “If such
      irregularities are suffered with impunity,” (it is thus that the
      bishop of Carthage chides the lenity of his colleague,) “if such
      irregularities are suffered, there is an end of EPISCOPAL VIGOR;
      149 an end of the sublime and divine power of governing the
      Church, an end of Christianity itself.” Cyprian had renounced
      those temporal honors which it is probable he would never have
      obtained; but the acquisition of such absolute command over the
      consciences and understanding of a congregation, however obscure
      or despised by the world, is more truly grateful to the pride of
      the human heart than the possession of the most despotic power,
      imposed by arms and conquest on a reluctant people.


      [ Gibbon has been accused of injustice to the character of
      Cyprian, as exalting the “censures and authority of the church
      above the observance of the moral duties.” Felicissimus had been
      condemned by a synod of bishops, (non tantum mea, sed plurimorum
      coepiscorum, sententia condemnatum,) on the charge not only of
      schism, but of embezzlement of public money, the debauching of
      virgins, and frequent acts of adultery. His violent menaces had
      extorted his readmission into the church, against which Cyprian
      protests with much vehemence: ne pecuniæ commissæ sibi fraudator,
      ne stuprator virginum, ne matrimoniorum multorum depopulator et
      corruptor, ultra adhuc sponsam Christi incorruptam præsentiæ suæ
      dedecore, et impudica atque incesta contagione, violaret. See
      Chelsum’s Remarks, p. 134. If these charges against Felicissimus
      were true, they were something more than “irregularities,” A
      Roman censor would have been a fairer subject of comparison than
      a consul. On the other hand, it must be admitted that the charge
      of adultery deepens very rapidly as the controversy becomes more
      violent. It is first represented as a single act, recently
      detected, and which men of character were prepared to
      substantiate: adulterii etiam crimen accedit. quod patres nostri
      graves viri deprehendisse se nuntiaverunt, et probaturos se
      asseverarunt. Epist. xxxviii. The heretic has now darkened into a
      man of notorious and general profligacy. Nor can it be denied
      that of the whole long epistle, very far the larger and the more
      passionate part dwells on the breach of ecclesiastical unity
      rather than on the violation of Christian holiness.—M.]


      149 (return) [ Cyprian Epist. 69.]


    [ This supposition appears unfounded: the birth and the talents of
    Cyprian might make us presume the contrary. Thascius Cæcilius
    Cyprianus, Carthaginensis, artis oratoriæ professione clarus,
    magnam sibi gloriam, opes, honores acquisivit, epularibus cænis et
    largis dapibus assuetus, pretiosa veste conspicuus, auro atque
    purpura fulgens, fascibus oblectatus et honoribus, stipatus
    clientium cuneis, frequentiore comitatu officii agminis honestatus,
    ut ipse de se loquitur in Epistola ad Donatum. See De Cave, Hist.
    Liter. b. i. p. 87.—G. Cave has rather embellished Cyprian’s
    language.—M.]


      In the course of this important, though perhaps tedious inquiry,
      I have attempted to display the secondary causes which so
      efficaciously assisted the truth of the Christian religion. If
      among these causes we have discovered any artificial ornaments,
      any accidental circumstances, or any mixture of error and
      passion, it cannot appear surprising that mankind should be the
      most sensibly affected by such motives as were suited to their
      imperfect nature. It was by the aid of these causes, exclusive
      zeal, the immediate expectation of another world, the claim of
      miracles, the practice of rigid virtue, and the constitution of
      the primitive church, that Christianity spread itself with so
      much success in the Roman empire. To the first of these the
      Christians were indebted for their invincible valor, which
      disdained to capitulate with the enemy whom they were resolved to
      vanquish. The three succeeding causes supplied their valor with
      the most formidable arms. The last of these causes united their
      courage, directed their arms, and gave their efforts that
      irresistible weight, which even a small band of well-trained and
      intrepid volunteers has so often possessed over an undisciplined
      multitude, ignorant of the subject and careless of the event of
      the war. In the various religions of Polytheism, some wandering
      fanatics of Egypt and Syria, who addressed themselves to the
      credulous superstition of the populace, were perhaps the only
      order of priests 150 that derived their whole support and credit
      from their sacerdotal profession, and were very deeply affected
      by a personal concern for the safety or prosperity of their
      tutelar deities. The ministers of Polytheism, both in Rome and in
      the provinces, were, for the most part, men of a noble birth, and
      of an affluent fortune, who received, as an honorable
      distinction, the care of a celebrated temple, or of a public
      sacrifice, exhibited, very frequently at their own expense, the
      sacred games, 151 and with cold indifference performed the
      ancient rites, according to the laws and fashion of their
      country. As they were engaged in the ordinary occupations of
      life, their zeal and devotion were seldom animated by a sense of
      interest, or by the habits of an ecclesiastical character.
      Confined to their respective temples and cities, they remained
      without any connection of discipline or government; and whilst
      they acknowledged the supreme jurisdiction of the senate, of the
      college of pontiffs, and of the emperor, those civil magistrates
      contented themselves with the easy task of maintaining in peace
      and dignity the general worship of mankind. We have already seen
      how various, how loose, and how uncertain were the religious
      sentiments of Polytheists. They were abandoned, almost without
      control, to the natural workings of a superstitious fancy. The
      accidental circumstances of their life and situation determined
      the object as well as the degree of their devotion; and as long
      as their adoration was successively prostituted to a thousand
      deities, it was scarcely possible that their hearts could be
      susceptible of a very sincere or lively passion for any of them.


      150 (return) [ The arts, the manners, and the vices of the
      priests of the Syrian goddess are very humorously described by
      Apuleius, in the eighth book of his Metamorphosis.]


      151 (return) [ The office of Asiarch was of this nature, and it
      is frequently mentioned in Aristides, the Inscriptions, &c. It
      was annual and elective. None but the vainest citizens could
      desire the honor; none but the most wealthy could support the
      expense. See, in the Patres Apostol. tom. ii. p. 200, with how
      much indifference Philip the Asiarch conducted himself in the
      martyrdom of Polycarp. There were likewise Bithyniarchs,
      Lyciarchs, &c.]


      When Christianity appeared in the world, even these faint and
      imperfect impressions had lost much of their original power.
      Human reason, which by its unassisted strength is incapable of
      perceiving the mysteries of faith, had already obtained an easy
      triumph over the folly of Paganism; and when Tertullian or
      Lactantius employ their labors in exposing its falsehood and
      extravagance, they are obliged to transcribe the eloquence of
      Cicero or the wit of Lucian. The contagion of these sceptical
      writings had been diffused far beyond the number of their
      readers. The fashion of incredulity was communicated from the
      philosopher to the man of pleasure or business, from the noble to
      the plebeian, and from the master to the menial slave who waited
      at his table, and who eagerly listened to the freedom of his
      conversation. On public occasions the philosophic part of mankind
      affected to treat with respect and decency the religious
      institutions of their country; but their secret contempt
      penetrated through the thin and awkward disguise; and even the
      people, when they discovered that their deities were rejected and
      derided by those whose rank or understanding they were accustomed
      to reverence, were filled with doubts and apprehensions
      concerning the truth of those doctrines, to which they had
      yielded the most implicit belief. The decline of ancient
      prejudice exposed a very numerous portion of human kind to the
      danger of a painful and comfortless situation. A state of
      scepticism and suspense may amuse a few inquisitive minds. But
      the practice of superstition is so congenial to the multitude,
      that if they are forcibly awakened, they still regret the loss of
      their pleasing vision. Their love of the marvellous and
      supernatural, their curiosity with regard to future events, and
      their strong propensity to extend their hopes and fears beyond
      the limits of the visible world, were the principal causes which
      favored the establishment of Polytheism. So urgent on the vulgar
      is the necessity of believing, that the fall of any system of
      mythology will most probably be succeeded by the introduction of
      some other mode of superstition. Some deities of a more recent
      and fashionable cast might soon have occupied the deserted
      temples of Jupiter and Apollo, if, in the decisive moment, the
      wisdom of Providence had not interposed a genuine revelation,
      fitted to inspire the most rational esteem and conviction,
      whilst, at the same time, it was adorned with all that could
      attract the curiosity, the wonder, and the veneration of the
      people. In their actual disposition, as many were almost
      disengaged from their artificial prejudices, but equally
      susceptible and desirous of a devout attachment; an object much
      less deserving would have been sufficient to fill the vacant
      place in their hearts, and to gratify the uncertain eagerness of
      their passions. Those who are inclined to pursue this reflection,
      instead of viewing with astonishment the rapid progress of
      Christianity, will perhaps be surprised that its success was not
      still more rapid and still more universal. It has been observed,
      with truth as well as propriety, that the conquests of Rome
      prepared and facilitated those of Christianity. In the second
      chapter of this work we have attempted to explain in what manner
      the most civilized provinces of Europe, Asia, and Africa were
      united under the dominion of one sovereign, and gradually
      connected by the most intimate ties of laws, of manners, and of
      language. The Jews of Palestine, who had fondly expected a
      temporal deliverer, gave so cold a reception to the miracles of
      the divine prophet, that it was found unnecessary to publish, or
      at least to preserve, any Hebrew gospel. 152 The authentic
      histories of the actions of Christ were composed in the Greek
      language, at a considerable distance from Jerusalem, and after
      the Gentile converts were grown extremely numerous. 153 As soon
      as those histories were translated into the Latin tongue, they
      were perfectly intelligible to all the subjects of Rome,
      excepting only to the peasants of Syria and Egypt, for whose
      benefit particular versions were afterwards made. The public
      highways, which had been constructed for the use of the legions,
      opened an easy passage for the Christian missionaries from
      Damascus to Corinth, and from Italy to the extremity of Spain or
      Britain; nor did those spiritual conquerors encounter any of the
      obstacles which usually retard or prevent the introduction of a
      foreign religion into a distant country. There is the strongest
      reason to believe, that before the reigns of Diocletian and
      Constantine, the faith of Christ had been preached in every
      province, and in all the great cities of the empire; but the
      foundation of the several congregations, the numbers of the
      faithful who composed them, and their proportion to the
      unbelieving multitude, are now buried in obscurity, or disguised
      by fiction and declamation. Such imperfect circumstances,
      however, as have reached our knowledge concerning the increase of
      the Christian name in Asia and Greece, in Egypt, in Italy, and in
      the West, we shall now proceed to relate, without neglecting the
      real or imaginary acquisitions which lay beyond the frontiers of
      the Roman empire.


      152 (return) [ The modern critics are not disposed to believe
      what the fathers almost unanimously assert, that St. Matthew
      composed a Hebrew gospel, of which only the Greek translation is
      extant. It seems, however, dangerous to reject their testimony. *
      Note: Strong reasons appear to confirm this testimony. Papias,
      contemporary of the Apostle St. John, says positively that
      Matthew had written the discourses of Jesus Christ in Hebrew, and
      that each interpreted them as he could. This Hebrew was the
      Syro-Chaldaic dialect, then in use at Jerusalem: Origen, Irenæus,
      Eusebius, Jerome, Epiphanius, confirm this statement. Jesus
      Christ preached himself in Syro-Chaldaic, as is proved by many
      words which he used, and which the Evangelists have taken the
      pains to translate. St. Paul, addressing the Jews, used the same
      language: Acts xxi. 40, xxii. 2, xxvi. 14. The opinions of some
      critics prove nothing against such undeniable testimonies.
      Moreover, their principal objection is, that St. Matthew quotes
      the Old Testament according to the Greek version of the LXX.,
      which is inaccurate; for of ten quotations, found in his Gospel,
      seven are evidently taken from the Hebrew text; the threo others
      offer little that differ: moreover, the latter are not literal
      quotations. St. Jerome says positively, that, according to a copy
      which he had seen in the library of Cæsarea, the quotations were
      made in Hebrew (in Catal.) More modern critics, among others
      Michaelis, do not entertain a doubt on the subject. The Greek
      version appears to have been made in the time of the apostles, as
      St. Jerome and St. Augustus affirm, perhaps by one of them.—G.
      ——Among modern critics, Dr. Hug has asserted the Greek original
      of St. Matthew, but the general opinion of the most learned
      biblical writer, supports the view of M. Guizot.—M.]


      153 (return) [ Under the reigns of Nero and Domitian, and in the
      cities of Alexandria, Antioch, Rome, and Ephesus. See Mill.
      Prolegomena ad Nov. Testament, and Dr. Lardner’s fair and
      extensive collection, vol. xv. Note: This question has, it is
      well known, been most elaborately discussed since the time of
      Gibbon. The Preface to the Translation of Schleier Macher’s
      Version of St. Luke contains a very able summary of the various
      theories.—M.]


      Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.—Part VIII.


      The rich provinces that extend from the Euphrates to the Ionian
      Sea were the principal theatre on which the apostle of the
      Gentiles displayed his zeal and piety. The seeds of the gospel,
      which he had scattered in a fertile soil, were diligently
      cultivated by his disciples; and it should seem that, during the
      two first centuries, the most considerable body of Christians was
      contained within those limits. Among the societies which were
      instituted in Syria, none were more ancient or more illustrious
      than those of Damascus, of Berea or Aleppo, and of Antioch. The
      prophetic introduction of the Apocalypse has described and
      immortalized the seven churches of Asia; Ephesus, Smyrna,
      Pergamus, Thyatira, 154 Sardes, Laodicea, and Philadelphia; and
      their colonies were soon diffused over that populous country. In
      a very early period, the islands of Cyprus and Crete, the
      provinces of Thrace and Macedonia, gave a favorable reception to
      the new religion; and Christian republics were soon founded in
      the cities of Corinth, of Sparta, and of Athens. 155 The
      antiquity of the Greek and Asiatic churches allowed a sufficient
      space of time for their increase and multiplication; and even the
      swarms of Gnostics and other heretics serve to display the
      flourishing condition of the orthodox church, since the
      appellation of heretics has always been applied to the less
      numerous party. To these domestic testimonies we may add the
      confession, the complaints, and the apprehensions of the Gentiles
      themselves. From the writings of Lucian, a philosopher who had
      studied mankind, and who describes their manners in the most
      lively colors, we may learn that, under the reign of Commodus,
      his native country of Pontus was filled with Epicureans and
      _Christians_. 156 Within fourscore years after the death of
      Christ, 157 the humane Pliny laments the magnitude of the evil
      which he vainly attempted to eradicate. In his very curious
      epistle to the emperor Trajan, he affirms that the temples were
      almost deserted, that the sacred victims scarcely found any
      purchasers, and that the superstition had not only infected the
      cities, but had even spread itself into the villages and the open
      country of Pontus and Bithynia. 158


      154 (return) [ The Alogians (Epiphanius de Hæres. 51) disputed
      the genuineness of the Apocalypse, because the church of Thyatira
      was not yet founded. Epiphanius, who allows the fact, extricates
      himself from the difficulty by ingeniously supposing that St.
      John wrote in the spirit of prophecy. See Abauzit, Discours sur
      l’Apocalypse.]


      155 (return) [ The epistles of Ignatius and Dionysius (ap. Euseb.
      iv. 23) point out many churches in Asia and Greece. That of
      Athens seems to have been one of the least flourishing.]


      156 (return) [ Lucian in Alexandro, c. 25. Christianity however,
      must have been very unequally diffused over Pontus; since, in the
      middle of the third century, there was no more than seventeen
      believers in the extensive diocese of Neo-Cæsarea. See M. de
      Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiast. tom. iv. p. 675, from Basil and
      Gregory of Nyssa, who were themselves natives of Cappadocia.
      Note: Gibbon forgot the conclusion of this story, that Gregory
      left only seventeen heathens in his diocese. The antithesis is
      suspicious, and both numbers may have been chosen to magnify the
      spiritual fame of the wonder-worker.—M.]


      157 (return) [ According to the ancients, Jesus Christ suffered
      under the consulship of the two Gemini, in the year 29 of our
      present æra. Pliny was sent into Bithynia (according to Pagi) in
      the year 110.]


      158 (return) [ Plin. Epist. x. 97.]


      Without descending into a minute scrutiny of the expressions or
      of the motives of those writers who either celebrate or lament
      the progress of Christianity in the East, it may in general be
      observed that none of them have left us any grounds from whence a
      just estimate might be formed of the real numbers of the faithful
      in those provinces. One circumstance, however, has been
      fortunately preserved, which seems to cast a more distinct light
      on this obscure but interesting subject. Under the reign of
      Theodosius, after Christianity had enjoyed, during more than
      sixty years, the sunshine of Imperial favor, the ancient and
      illustrious church of Antioch consisted of one hundred thousand
      persons, three thousand of whom were supported out of the public
      oblations. 159 The splendor and dignity of the queen of the East,
      the acknowledged populousness of Cæsarea, Seleucia, and
      Alexandria, and the destruction of two hundred and fifty thousand
      souls in the earthquake which afflicted Antioch under the elder
      Justin, 160 are so many convincing proofs that the whole number
      of its inhabitants was not less than half a million, and that the
      Christians, however multiplied by zeal and power, did not exceed
      a fifth part of that great city. How different a proportion must
      we adopt when we compare the persecuted with the triumphant
      church, the West with the East, remote villages with populous
      towns, and countries recently converted to the faith with the
      place where the believers first received the appellation of
      Christians! It must not, however, be dissembled, that, in another
      passage, Chrysostom, to whom we are indebted for this useful
      information, computes the multitude of the faithful as even
      superior to that of the Jews and Pagans. 161 But the solution of
      this apparent difficulty is easy and obvious. The eloquent
      preacher draws a parallel between the civil and the
      ecclesiastical constitution of Antioch; between the list of
      Christians who had acquired heaven by baptism, and the list of
      citizens who had a right to share the public liberality. Slaves,
      strangers, and infants were comprised in the former; they were
      excluded from the latter.


      159 (return) [ Chrysostom. Opera, tom. vii. p. 658, 810, (edit.
      Savil. ii. 422, 329.)]


      160 (return) [ John Malala, tom. ii. p. 144. He draws the same
      conclusion with regard to the populousness of antioch.]


      161 (return) [ Chrysostom. tom. i. p. 592. I am indebted for
      these passages, though not for my inference, to the learned Dr.
      Lardner. Credibility of the Gospel of History, vol. xii. p. 370.
      * Note: The statements of Chrysostom with regard to the
      population of Antioch, whatever may be their accuracy, are
      perfectly consistent. In one passage he reckons the population at
      200,000. In a second the Christians at 100,000. In a third he
      states that the Christians formed more than half the population.
      Gibbon has neglected to notice the first passage, and has drawn
      by estimate of the population of Antioch from other sources. The
      8000 maintained by alms were widows and virgins alone—M.]


      The extensive commerce of Alexandria, and its proximity to
      Palestine, gave an easy entrance to the new religion. It was at
      first embraced by great numbers of the Theraputæ, or Essenians,
      of the Lake Mareotis, a Jewish sect which had abated much of its
      reverence for the Mosaic ceremonies. The austere life of the
      Essenians, their fasts and excommunications, the community of
      goods, the love of celibacy, their zeal for martyrdom, and the
      warmth though not the purity of their faith, already offered a
      very lively image of the primitive discipline. 162 It was in the
      school of Alexandria that the Christian theology appears to have
      assumed a regular and scientific form; and when Hadrian visited
      Egypt, he found a church composed of Jews and of Greeks,
      sufficiently important to attract the notice of that inquisitive
      prince. 163 But the progress of Christianity was for a long time
      confined within the limits of a single city, which was itself a
      foreign colony, and till the close of the second century the
      predecessors of Demetrius were the only prelates of the Egyptian
      church. Three bishops were consecrated by the hands of Demetrius,
      and the number was increased to twenty by his successor Heraclas.
      164 The body of the natives, a people distinguished by a sullen
      inflexibility of temper, 165 entertained the new doctrine with
      coldness and reluctance; and even in the time of Origen, it was
      rare to meet with an Egyptian who had surmounted his early
      prejudices in favor of the sacred animals of his country. 166 As
      soon, indeed, as Christianity ascended the throne, the zeal of
      those barbarians obeyed the prevailing impulsion; the cities of
      Egypt were filled with bishops, and the deserts of Thebais
      swarmed with hermits.


      162 (return) [ Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, l. 2, c. 20, 21, 22,
      23, has examined with the most critical accuracy the curious
      treatise of Philo, which describes the Therapeutæ. By proving
      that it was composed as early as the time of Augustus, Basnage
      has demonstrated, in spite of Eusebius (l. ii. c. 17) and a crowd
      of modern Catholics, that the Therapeutæ were neither Christians
      nor monks. It still remains probable that they changed their
      name, preserved their manners, adopted some new articles of
      faith, and gradually became the fathers of the Egyptian
      Ascetics.]


      163 (return) [ See a letter of Hadrian in the Augustan History,
      p. 245.]


      164 (return) [ For the succession of Alexandrian bishops, consult
      Renaudot’s History, p. 24, &c. This curious fact is preserved by
      the patriarch Eutychius, (Annal. tom. i. p. 334, Vers. Pocock,)
      and its internal evidence would alone be a sufficient answer to
      all the objections which Bishop Pearson has urged in the Vindiciæ
      Ignatianæ.]


      165 (return) [ Ammian. Marcellin. xxii. 16.]


      166 (return) [ Origen contra Celsum, l. i. p. 40.]


      A perpetual stream of strangers and provincials flowed into the
      capacious bosom of Rome. Whatever was strange or odious, whoever
      was guilty or suspected, might hope, in the obscurity of that
      immense capital, to elude the vigilance of the law. In such a
      various conflux of nations, every teacher, either of truth or
      falsehood, every founder, whether of a virtuous or a criminal
      association, might easily multiply his disciples or accomplices.
      The Christians of Rome, at the time of the accidental persecution
      of Nero, are represented by Tacitus as already amounting to a
      very great multitude, 167 and the language of that great
      historian is almost similar to the style employed by Livy, when
      he relates the introduction and the suppression of the rites of
      Bacchus. After the Bacchanals had awakened the severity of the
      senate, it was likewise apprehended that a very great multitude,
      as it were _another people_, had been initiated into those
      abhorred mysteries. A more careful inquiry soon demonstrated that
      the offenders did not exceed seven thousand; a number indeed
      sufficiently alarming, when considered as the object of public
      justice. 168 It is with the same candid allowance that we should
      interpret the vague expressions of Tacitus, and in a former
      instance of Pliny, when they exaggerate the crowds of deluded
      fanatics who had forsaken the established worship of the gods.
      The church of Rome was undoubtedly the first and most populous of
      the empire; and we are possessed of an authentic record which
      attests the state of religion in that city about the middle of
      the third century, and after a peace of thirty-eight years. The
      clergy, at that time, consisted of a bishop, forty-six
      presbyters, seven deacons, as many sub-deacons, forty-two
      acolytes, and fifty readers, exorcists, and porters. The number
      of widows, of the infirm, and of the poor, who were maintained by
      the oblations of the faithful, amounted to fifteen hundred. 169
      From reason, as well as from the analogy of Antioch, we may
      venture to estimate the Christians of Rome at about fifty
      thousand. The populousness of that great capital cannot perhaps
      be exactly ascertained; but the most modest calculation will not
      surely reduce it lower than a million of inhabitants, of whom the
      Christians might constitute at the most a twentieth part. 170


      167 (return) [ Ingens multitudo is the expression of Tacitus, xv.
      44.]


      168 (return) [ T. Liv. xxxix. 13, 15, 16, 17. Nothing could
      exceed the horror and consternation of the senate on the
      discovery of the Bacchanalians, whose depravity is described, and
      perhaps exaggerated, by Livy.]


      169 (return) [ Eusebius, l. vi. c. 43. The Latin translator (M.
      de Valois) has thought proper to reduce the number of presbyters
      to forty-four.]


      170 (return) [ This proportion of the presbyters and of the poor,
      to the rest of the people, was originally fixed by Burnet,
      (Travels into Italy, p. 168,) and is approved by Moyle, (vol. ii.
      p. 151.) They were both unacquainted with the passage of
      Chrysostom, which converts their conjecture almost into a fact.]


      The western provincials appeared to have derived the knowledge of
      Christianity from the same source which had diffused among them
      the language, the sentiments, and the manners of Rome.


      In this more important circumstance, Africa, as well as Gaul was
      gradually fashioned to the imitation of the capital. Yet
      notwithstanding the many favorable occasions which might invite
      the Roman missionaries to visit their Latin provinces, it was
      late before they passed either the sea or the Alps; 171 nor can
      we discover in those great countries any assured traces either of
      faith or of persecution that ascend higher than the reign of the
      Antonines. 172 The slow progress of the gospel in the cold
      climate of Gaul, was extremely different from the eagerness with
      which it seems to have been received on the burning sands of
      Africa. The African Christians soon formed one of the principal
      members of the primitive church. The practice introduced into
      that province of appointing bishops to the most inconsiderable
      towns, and very frequently to the most obscure villages,
      contributed to multiply the splendor and importance of their
      religious societies, which during the course of the third century
      were animated by the zeal of Tertullian, directed by the
      abilities of Cyprian, and adorned by the eloquence of Lactantius.


      But if, on the contrary, we turn our eyes towards Gaul, we must
      content ourselves with discovering, in the time of Marcus
      Antoninus, the feeble and united congregations of Lyons and
      Vienna; and even as late as the reign of Decius we are assured,
      that in a few cities only, Arles, Narbonne, Thoulouse, Limoges,
      Clermont, Tours, and Paris, some scattered churches were
      supported by the devotion of a small number of Christians. 173
      Silence is indeed very consistent with devotion; but as it is
      seldom compatible with zeal, we may perceive and lament the
      languid state of Christianity in those provinces which had
      exchanged the Celtic for the Latin tongue, since they did not,
      during the three first centuries, give birth to a single
      ecclesiastical writer. From Gaul, which claimed a just
      preeminence of learning and authority over all the countries on
      this side of the Alps, the light of the gospel was more faintly
      reflected on the remote provinces of Spain and Britain; and if we
      may credit the vehement assertions of Tertullian, they had
      already received the first rays of the faith, when he addressed
      his apology to the magistrates of the emperor Severus. 174 But
      the obscure and imperfect origin of the western churches of
      Europe has been so negligently recorded, that if we would relate
      the time and manner of their foundation, we must supply the
      silence of antiquity by those legends which avarice or
      superstition long afterwards dictated to the monks in the lazy
      gloom of their convents. 175 Of these holy romances, that of the
      apostle St. James can alone, by its singular extravagance,
      deserve to be mentioned. From a peaceful fisherman of the Lake of
      Gennesareth, he was transformed into a valorous knight, who
      charged at the head of the Spanish chivalry in their battles
      against the Moors. The gravest historians have celebrated his
      exploits; the miraculous shrine of Compostella displayed his
      power; and the sword of a military order, assisted by the terrors
      of the Inquisition, was sufficient to remove every objection of
      profane criticism. 176


      171 (return) [ Serius trans Alpes, religione Dei suscepta.
      Sulpicius Severus, l. ii. With regard to Africa, see Tertullian
      ad Scapulam, c. 3. It is imagined that the Scyllitan martyrs were
      the first, (Acta Sincera Rumart. p. 34.) One of the adversaries
      of Apuleius seems to have been a Christian. Apolog. p. 496, 497,
      edit. Delphin.]


      172 (return) [ Tum primum intra Gallias martyria visa. Sulp.
      Severus, l. ii. These were the celebrated martyrs of Lyons. See
      Eusebius, v. i. Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiast. tom. ii. p. 316.
      According to the Donatists, whose assertion is confirmed by the
      tacit acknowledgment of Augustin, Africa was the last of the
      provinces which received the gospel. Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiast.
      tom. i. p. 754.]


      173 (return) [ Raræ in aliquibus civitatibus ecclesiæ, paucorum
      Christianorum devotione, resurgerent. Acta Sincera, p. 130.
      Gregory of Tours, l i. c. 28. Mosheim, p. 207, 449. There is some
      reason to believe that in the beginning of the fourth century,
      the extensive dioceses of Liege, of Treves, and of Cologne,
      composed a single bishopric, which had been very recently
      founded. See Memoires de Tillemont, tom vi. part i. p. 43, 411.]


      174 (return) [ The date of Tertullian’s Apology is fixed, in a
      dissertation of Mosheim, to the year 198.]


      175 (return) [ In the fifteenth century, there were few who had
      either inclination or courage to question, whether Joseph of
      Arimathea founded the monastery of Glastonbury, and whether
      Dionysius the Areopagite preferred the residence of Paris to that
      of Athens.]


      176 (return) [ The stupendous metamorphosis was performed in the
      ninth century. See Mariana, (Hist. Hispan. l. vii. c. 13, tom. i.
      p. 285, edit. Hag. Com. 1733,) who, in every sense, imitates
      Livy, and the honest detection of the legend of St. James by Dr.
      Geddes, Miscellanies, vol. ii. p. 221.]


      The progress of Christianity was not confined to the Roman
      empire; and according to the primitive fathers, who interpret
      facts by prophecy, the new religion, within a century after the
      death of its divine Author, had already visited every part of the
      globe. “There exists not,” says Justin Martyr, “a people, whether
      Greek or Barbarian, or any other race of men, by whatsoever
      appellation or manners they may be distinguished, however
      ignorant of arts or agriculture, whether they dwell under tents,
      or wander about in covered wagons, among whom prayers are not
      offered up in the name of a crucified Jesus to the Father and
      Creator of all things.” 177 But this splendid exaggeration, which
      even at present it would be extremely difficult to reconcile with
      the real state of mankind, can be considered only as the rash
      sally of a devout but careless writer, the measure of whose
      belief was regulated by that of his wishes. But neither the
      belief nor the wishes of the fathers can alter the truth of
      history. It will still remain an undoubted fact, that the
      barbarians of Scythia and Germany, who afterwards subverted the
      Roman monarchy, were involved in the darkness of paganism; and
      that even the conversion of Iberia, of Armenia, or of Æthiopia,
      was not attempted with any degree of success till the sceptre was
      in the hands of an orthodox emperor. 178 Before that time, the
      various accidents of war and commerce might indeed diffuse an
      imperfect knowledge of the gospel among the tribes of Caledonia,
      179 and among the borderers of the Rhine, the Danube, and the
      Euphrates. 180 Beyond the last-mentioned river, Edessa was
      distinguished by a firm and early adherence to the faith. 181
      From Edessa the principles of Christianity were easily introduced
      into the Greek and Syrian cities which obeyed the successors of
      Artaxerxes; but they do not appear to have made any deep
      impression on the minds of the Persians, whose religious system,
      by the labors of a well-disciplined order of priests, had been
      constructed with much more art and solidity than the uncertain
      mythology of Greece and Rome. 182


      177 (return) [ Justin Martyr, Dialog. cum Tryphon. p. 341.
      Irenæus adv. Hæres. l. i. c. 10. Tertullian adv. Jud. c. 7. See
      Mosheim, p. 203.]


      178 (return) [ See the fourth century of Mosheim’s History of the
      Church. Many, though very confused circumstances, that relate to
      the conversion of Iberia and Armenia, may be found in Moses of
      Chorene, l. ii. c. 78—89. Note: Mons. St. Martin has shown that
      Armenia was the first nation that embraced Christianity. Memoires
      sur l’Armenie, vol. i. p. 306, and notes to Le Beæ. Gibbon,
      indeed had expressed his intention of withdrawing the words “of
      Armenia” from the text of future editions. (Vindication, Works,
      iv. 577.) He was bitterly taunted by Person for neglecting or
      declining to fulfil his promise. Preface to Letters to
      Travis.—M.]


      179 (return) [ According to Tertullian, the Christian faith had
      penetrated into parts of Britain inaccessible to the Roman arms.
      About a century afterwards, Ossian, the son of Fingal, is said to
      have disputed, in his extreme old age, with one of the foreign
      missionaries, and the dispute is still extant, in verse, and in
      the Erse language. See Mr. Macpher son’s Dissertation on the
      Antiquity of Ossian’s Poems, p. 10.]


      180 (return) [ The Goths, who ravaged Asia in the reign of
      Gallienus, carried away great numbers of captives; some of whom
      were Christians, and became missionaries. See Tillemont, Memoires
      Ecclesiast. tom. iv. p. 44.]


      181 (return) [ The legends of Abgarus, fabulous as it is, affords
      a decisive proof, that many years before Eusebius wrote his
      history, the greatest part of the inhabitants of Edessa had
      embraced Christianity. Their rivals, the citizens of Carrhæ,
      adhered, on the contrary, to the cause of Paganism, as late as
      the sixth century.]


      182 (return) [ According to Bardesanes (ap. Euseb. Præpar.
      Evangel.) there were some Christians in Persia before the end of
      the second century. In the time of Constantine (see his epistle
      to Sapor, Vit. l. iv. c. 13) they composed a flourishing church.
      Consult Beausobre, Hist. Cristique du Manicheisme, tom. i. p.
      180, and the Bibliotheca Orietalis of Assemani.]


      Chapter XV: Progress Of The Christian Religion.—Part IX.


      From this impartial though imperfect survey of the progress of
      Christianity, it may perhaps seem probable, that the number of
      its proselytes has been excessively magnified by fear on the one
      side, and by devotion on the other. According to the
      irreproachable testimony of Origen, 183 the proportion of the
      faithful was very inconsiderable, when compared with the
      multitude of an unbelieving world; but, as we are left without
      any distinct information, it is impossible to determine, and it
      is difficult even to conjecture, the real numbers of the
      primitive Christians. The most favorable calculation, however,
      that can be deduced from the examples of Antioch and of Rome,
      will not permit us to imagine that more than a twentieth part of
      the subjects of the empire had enlisted themselves under the
      banner of the cross before the important conversion of
      Constantine. But their habits of faith, of zeal, and of union,
      seemed to multiply their numbers; and the same causes which
      contributed to their future increase, served to render their
      actual strength more apparent and more formidable.


      183 (return) [Origen contra Celsum, l. viii. p. 424.]


      Such is the constitution of civil society, that, whilst a few
      persons are distinguished by riches, by honors, and by knowledge,
      the body of the people is condemned to obscurity, ignorance and
      poverty. The Christian religion, which addressed itself to the
      whole human race, must consequently collect a far greater number
      of proselytes from the lower than from the superior ranks of
      life. This innocent and natural circumstance has been improved
      into a very odious imputation, which seems to be less strenuously
      denied by the apologists, than it is urged by the adversaries, of
      the faith; that the new sect of Christians was almost entirely
      composed of the dregs of the populace, of peasants and mechanics,
      of boys and women, of beggars and slaves, the last of whom might
      sometimes introduce the missionaries into the rich and noble
      families to which they belonged. These obscure teachers (such was
      the charge of malice and infidelity) are as mute in public as
      they are loquacious and dogmatical in private. Whilst they
      cautiously avoid the dangerous encounter of philosophers, they
      mingle with the rude and illiterate crowd, and insinuate
      themselves into those minds whom their age, their sex, or their
      education, has the best disposed to receive the impression of
      superstitious terrors. 184


      184 (return) [ Minucius Felix, c. 8, with Wowerus’s notes. Celsus
      ap. Origen, l. iii. p. 138, 142. Julian ap. Cyril. l. vi. p. 206,
      edit. Spanheim.]


      This unfavorable picture, though not devoid of a faint
      resemblance, betrays, by its dark coloring and distorted
      features, the pencil of an enemy. As the humble faith of Christ
      diffused itself through the world, it was embraced by several
      persons who derived some consequence from the advantages of
      nature or fortune. Aristides, who presented an eloquent apology
      to the emperor Hadrian, was an Athenian philosopher. 185 Justin
      Martyr had sought divine knowledge in the schools of Zeno, of
      Aristotle, of Pythagoras, and of Plato, before he fortunately was
      accosted by the old man, or rather the angel, who turned his
      attention to the study of the Jewish prophets. 186 Clemens of
      Alexandria had acquired much various reading in the Greek, and
      Tertullian in the Latin, language. Julius Africanus and Origen
      possessed a very considerable share of the learning of their
      times; and although the style of Cyprian is very different from
      that of Lactantius, we might almost discover that both those
      writers had been public teachers of rhetoric. Even the study of
      philosophy was at length introduced among the Christians, but it
      was not always productive of the most salutary effects; knowledge
      was as often the parent of heresy as of devotion, and the
      description which was designed for the followers of Artemon, may,
      with equal propriety, be applied to the various sects that
      resisted the successors of the apostles. “They presume to alter
      the Holy Scriptures, to abandon the ancient rule of faith, and to
      form their opinions according to the subtile precepts of logic.
      The science of the church is neglected for the study of geometry,
      and they lose sight of heaven while they are employed in
      measuring the earth. Euclid is perpetually in their hands.
      Aristotle and Theophrastus are the objects of their admiration;
      and they express an uncommon reverence for the works of Galen.
      Their errors are derived from the abuse of the arts and sciences
      of the infidels, and they corrupt the simplicity of the gospel by
      the refinements of human reason.” 187


      185 (return) [ Euseb. Hist. Eccles. iv. 3. Hieronym. Epist. 83.]


      186 (return) [ The story is prettily told in Justin’s Dialogues.
      Tillemont, (Mem Ecclesiast. tom. ii. p. 384,) who relates it
      after him is sure that the old man was a disguised angel.]


      187 (return) [ Eusebius, v. 28. It may be hoped, that none,
      except the heretics, gave occasion to the complaint of Celsus,
      (ap. Origen, l. ii. p. 77,) that the Christians were perpetually
      correcting and altering their Gospels. * Note: Origen states in
      reply, that he knows of none who had altered the Gospels except
      the Marcionites, the Valentinians, and perhaps some followers of
      Lucanus.—M.]


      Nor can it be affirmed with truth, that the advantages of birth
      and fortune were always separated from the profession of
      Christianity. Several Roman citizens were brought before the
      tribunal of Pliny, and he soon discovered, that a great number of
      persons of _every order_ of men in Bithynia had deserted the
      religion of their ancestors. 188 His unsuspected testimony may,
      in this instance, obtain more credit than the bold challenge of
      Tertullian, when he addresses himself to the fears as well as the
      humanity of the proconsul of Africa, by assuring him, that if he
      persists in his cruel intentions, he must decimate Carthage, and
      that he will find among the guilty many persons of his own rank,
      senators and matrons of noblest extraction, and the friends or
      relations of his most intimate friends. 189 It appears, however,
      that about forty years afterwards the emperor Valerian was
      persuaded of the truth of this assertion, since in one of his
      rescripts he evidently supposes that senators, Roman knights, and
      ladies of quality, were engaged in the Christian sect. 190 The
      church still continued to increase its outward splendor as it
      lost its internal purity; and, in the reign of Diocletian, the
      palace, the courts of justice, and even the army, concealed a
      multitude of Christians, who endeavored to reconcile the
      interests of the present with those of a future life.


      188 (return) [ Plin. Epist. x. 97. Fuerunt alii similis amentiæ,
      cives Romani—-Multi enim omnis ætatis, omnis ordinis, utriusque
      sexus, etiam vocuntur in periculum et vocabuntur.]


      189 (return) [ Tertullian ad Scapulum. Yet even his rhetoric
      rises no higher than to claim a tenth part of Carthage.]


      190 (return) [ Cyprian. Epist. 70.]


      And yet these exceptions are either too few in number, or too
      recent in time, entirely to remove the imputation of ignorance
      and obscurity which has been so arrogantly cast on the first
      proselytes of Christianity. 1901 Instead of employing in our
      defence the fictions of later ages, it will be more prudent to
      convert the occasion of scandal into a subject of edification.
      Our serious thoughts will suggest to us, that the apostles
      themselves were chosen by Providence among the fishermen of
      Galilee, and that the lower we depress the temporal condition of
      the first Christians, the more reason we shall find to admire
      their merit and success. It is incumbent on us diligently to
      remember, that the kingdom of heaven was promised to the poor in
      spirit, and that minds afflicted by calamity and the contempt of
      mankind, cheerfully listen to the divine promise of future
      happiness; while, on the contrary, the fortunate are satisfied
      with the possession of this world; and the wise abuse in doubt
      and dispute their vain superiority of reason and knowledge.


      1901 (return) [ This incomplete enumeration ought to be increased
      by the names of several Pagans converted at the dawn of
      Christianity, and whose conversion weakens the reproach which the
      historian appears to support. Such are, the Proconsul Sergius
      Paulus, converted at Paphos, (Acts xiii. 7—12.) Dionysius, member
      of the Areopagus, converted with several others, al Athens, (Acts
      xvii. 34;) several persons at the court of Nero, (Philip. iv 22;)
      Erastus, receiver at Corinth, (Rom. xvi.23;) some Asiarchs, (Acts
      xix. 31) As to the philosophers, we may add Tatian, Athenagoras,
      Theophilus of Antioch, Hegesippus, Melito, Miltiades, Pantænus,
      Ammenius, all distinguished for their genius and learning.—G.]


      We stand in need of such reflections to comfort us for the loss
      of some illustrious characters, which in our eyes might have
      seemed the most worthy of the heavenly present. The names of
      Seneca, of the elder and the younger Pliny, of Tacitus, of
      Plutarch, of Galen, of the slave Epictetus, and of the emperor
      Marcus Antoninus, adorn the age in which they flourished, and
      exalt the dignity of human nature. They filled with glory their
      respective stations, either in active or contemplative life;
      their excellent understandings were improved by study; Philosophy
      had purified their minds from the prejudices of the popular
      superstitions; and their days were spent in the pursuit of truth
      and the practice of virtue. Yet all these sages (it is no less an
      object of surprise than of concern) overlooked or rejected the
      perfection of the Christian system. Their language or their
      silence equally discover their contempt for the growing sect,
      which in their time had diffused itself over the Roman empire.
      Those among them who condescended to mention the Christians,
      consider them only as obstinate and perverse enthusiasts, who
      exacted an implicit submission to their mysterious doctrines,
      without being able to produce a single argument that could engage
      the attention of men of sense and learning. 191


      191 (return) [ Dr. Lardner, in his first and second volumes of
      Jewish and Christian testimonies, collects and illustrates those
      of Pliny the younger, of Tacitus, of Galen, of Marcus Antoninus,
      and perhaps of Epictetus, (for it is doubtful whether that
      philosopher means to speak of the Christians.) The new sect is
      totally unnoticed by Seneca, the elder Pliny, and Plutarch.]


      It is at least doubtful whether any of these philosophers perused
      the apologies 1911 which the primitive Christians repeatedly
      published in behalf of themselves and of their religion; but it
      is much to be lamented that such a cause was not defended by
      abler advocates. They expose with superfluous wit and eloquence
      the extravagance of Polytheism. They interest our compassion by
      displaying the innocence and sufferings of their injured
      brethren. But when they would demonstrate the divine origin of
      Christianity, they insist much more strongly on the predictions
      which announced, than on the miracles which accompanied, the
      appearance of the Messiah. Their favorite argument might serve to
      edify a Christian or to convert a Jew, since both the one and the
      other acknowledge the authority of those prophecies, and both are
      obliged, with devout reverence, to search for their sense and
      their accomplishment. But this mode of persuasion loses much of
      its weight and influence, when it is addressed to those who
      neither understand nor respect the Mosaic dispensation and the
      prophetic style. 192 In the unskilful hands of Justin and of the
      succeeding apologists, the sublime meaning of the Hebrew oracles
      evaporates in distant types, affected conceits, and cold
      allegories; and even their authenticity was rendered suspicious
      to an unenlightened Gentile, by the mixture of pious forgeries,
      which, under the names of Orpheus, Hermes, and the Sibyls, 193
      were obtruded on him as of equal value with the genuine
      inspirations of Heaven. The adoption of fraud and sophistry in
      the defence of revelation too often reminds us of the injudicious
      conduct of those poets who load their _invulnerable_ heroes with
      a useless weight of cumbersome and brittle armor.


      1911 (return) [ The emperors Hadrian, Antoninus &c., read with
      astonishment the apologies of Justin Martyr, of Aristides, of
      Melito, &c. (See St. Hieron. ad mag. orat. Orosius, lviii. c.
      13.) Eusebius says expressly, that the cause of Christianity was
      defended before the senate, in a very elegant discourse, by
      Apollonius the Martyr.—G. ——Gibbon, in his severer spirit of
      criticism, may have questioned the authority of Jerome and
      Eusebius. There are some difficulties about Apollonius, which
      Heinichen (note in loc. Eusebii) would solve, by suppose lag him
      to have been, as Jerome states, a senator.—M.]


      192 (return) [ If the famous prophecy of the Seventy Weeks had
      been alleged to a Roman philosopher, would he not have replied in
      the words of Cicero, “Quæ tandem ista auguratio est, annorum
      potius quam aut rænsium aut dierum?” De Divinatione, ii. 30.
      Observe with what irreverence Lucian, (in Alexandro, c. 13.) and
      his friend Celsus ap. Origen, (l. vii. p. 327,) express
      themselves concerning the Hebrew prophets.]


      193 (return) [ The philosophers who derided the more ancient
      predictions of the Sibyls, would easily have detected the Jewish
      and Christian forgeries, which have been so triumphantly quoted
      by the fathers, from Justin Martyr to Lactantius. When the
      Sibylline verses had performed their appointed task, they, like
      the system of the millennium, were quietly laid aside. The
      Christian Sybil had unluckily fixed the ruin of Rome for the year
      195, A. U. C. 948.]


      But how shall we excuse the supine inattention of the Pagan and
      philosophic world, to those evidences which were represented by
      the hand of Omnipotence, not to their reason, but to their
      senses? During the age of Christ, of his apostles, and of their
      first disciples, the doctrine which they preached was confirmed
      by innumerable prodigies. The lame walked, the blind saw, the
      sick were healed, the dead were raised, dæmons were expelled, and
      the laws of Nature were frequently suspended for the benefit of
      the church. But the sages of Greece and Rome turned aside from
      the awful spectacle, and, pursuing the ordinary occupations of
      life and study, appeared unconscious of any alterations in the
      moral or physical government of the world. Under the reign of
      Tiberius, the whole earth, 194 or at least a celebrated province
      of the Roman empire, 195 was involved in a preternatural darkness
      of three hours. Even this miraculous event, which ought to have
      excited the wonder, the curiosity, and the devotion of mankind,
      passed without notice in an age of science and history. 196 It
      happened during the lifetime of Seneca and the elder Pliny, who
      must have experienced the immediate effects, or received the
      earliest intelligence, of the prodigy. Each of these
      philosophers, in a laborious work, has recorded all the great
      phenomena of Nature, earthquakes, meteors, comets, and eclipses,
      which his indefatigable curiosity could collect. 197 Both the one
      and the other have omitted to mention the greatest phenomenon to
      which the mortal eye has been witness since the creation of the
      globe. A distinct chapter of Pliny 198 is designed for eclipses
      of an extraordinary nature and unusual duration; but he contents
      himself with describing the singular defect of light which
      followed the murder of Cæsar, when, during the greatest part of a
      year, the orb of the sun appeared pale and without splendor. The
      season of obscurity, which cannot surely be compared with the
      preternatural darkness of the Passion, had been already
      celebrated by most of the poets 199 and historians of that
      memorable age. 200


      194 (return) [ The fathers, as they are drawn out in battle array
      by Dom Calmet, (Dissertations sur la Bible, tom. iii. p.
      295—308,) seem to cover the whole earth with darkness, in which
      they are followed by most of the moderns.]


      195 (return) [ Origen ad Matth. c. 27, and a few modern critics,
      Beza, Le Clerc, Lardner, &c., are desirous of confining it to the
      land of Judea.]


      196 (return) [ The celebrated passage of Phlegon is now wisely
      abandoned. When Tertullian assures the Pagans that the mention of
      the prodigy is found in Arcanis (not Archivis) vestris, (see his
      Apology, c. 21,) he probably appeals to the Sibylline verses,
      which relate it exactly in the words of the Gospel. * Note:
      According to some learned theologians a misunderstanding of the
      text in the Gospel has given rise to this mistake, which has
      employed and wearied so many laborious commentators, though
      Origen had already taken the pains to preinform them. The
      expression does not mean, they assert, an eclipse, but any kind
      of obscurity occasioned in the atmosphere, whether by clouds or
      any other cause. As this obscuration of the sun rarely took place
      in Palestine, where in the middle of April the sky was usually
      clear, it assumed, in the eyes of the Jews and Christians, an
      importance conformable to the received notion, that the sun
      concealed at midday was a sinister presage. See Amos viii. 9, 10.
      The word is often taken in this sense by contemporary writers;
      the Apocalypse says the sun was concealed, when speaking of an
      obscuration caused by smoke and dust. (Revel. ix. 2.) Moreover,
      the Hebrew word ophal, which in the LXX. answers to the Greek,
      signifies any darkness; and the Evangelists, who have modelled
      the sense of their expressions by those of the LXX., must have
      taken it in the same latitude. This darkening of the sky usually
      precedes earthquakes. (Matt. xxvii. 51.) The Heathen authors
      furnish us a number of examples, of which a miraculous
      explanation was given at the time. See Ovid. ii. v. 33, l. xv. v.
      785. Pliny, Hist. Nat. l. ii. c 30. Wetstein has collected all
      these examples in his edition of the New Testament. We need not,
      then, be astonished at the silence of the Pagan authors
      concerning a phenomenon which did not extend beyond Jerusalem,
      and which might have nothing contrary to the laws of nature;
      although the Christians and the Jews may have regarded it as a
      sinister presage. See Michaelis Notes on New Testament, v. i. p.
      290. Paulus, Commentary on New Testament, iii. p. 760.—G.]


      197 (return) [ Seneca, Quæst. Natur. l. i. 15, vi. l. vii. 17.
      Plin. Hist. Natur. l. ii.]


      198 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. ii. 30.]


      199 (return) [ Virgil. Georgic. i. 466. Tibullus, l. i. Eleg. v.
      ver. 75. Ovid Metamorph. xv. 782. Lucan. Pharsal. i. 540. The
      last of these poets places this prodigy before the civil war.]


      200 (return) [ See a public epistle of M. Antony in Joseph.
      Antiquit. xiv. 12. Plutarch in Cæsar. p. 471. Appian. Bell.
      Civil. l. iv. Dion Cassius, l. xlv. p. 431. Julius Obsequens, c.
      128. His little treatise is an abstract of Livy’s prodigies.]




      VOLUME TWO


      Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
      Constantine.—Part I.

     The Conduct Of The Roman Government Towards The Christians, From
     The Reign Of Nero To That Of Constantine. 1111


      1111 (return) [ The sixteenth chapter I cannot help considering
      as a very ingenious and specious, but very disgraceful
      extenuation of the cruelties perpetrated by the Roman magistrates
      against the Christians. It is written in the most contemptibly
      factious spirit of prejudice against the sufferers; it is
      unworthy of a philosopher and of humanity. Let the narrative of
      Cyprian’s death be examined. He had to relate the murder of an
      innocent man of advanced age, and in a station deemed venerable
      by a considerable body of the provincials of Africa, put to death
      because he refused to sacrifice to Jupiter. Instead of pointing
      the indignation of posterity against such an atrocious act of
      tyranny, he dwells, with visible art, on the small circumstances
      of decorum and politeness which attended this murder, and which
      he relates with as much parade as if they were the most important
      particulars of the event. Dr. Robertson has been the subject of
      much blame for his real or supposed lenity towards the Spanish
      murderers and tyrants in America. That the sixteenth chapter of
      Mr. G. did not excite the same or greater disapprobation, is a
      proof of the unphilosophical and indeed fanatical animosity
      against Christianity, which was so prevalent during the latter
      part of the eighteenth century.—_Mackintosh:_ see Life, i. p.
      244, 245.]


      If we seriously consider the purity of the Christian religion,
      the sanctity of its moral precepts, and the innocent as well as
      austere lives of the greater number of those who during the first
      ages embraced the faith of the gospel, we should naturally
      suppose, that so benevolent a doctrine would have been received
      with due reverence, even by the unbelieving world; that the
      learned and the polite, however they may deride the miracles,
      would have esteemed the virtues, of the new sect; and that the
      magistrates, instead of persecuting, would have protected an
      order of men who yielded the most passive obedience to the laws,
      though they declined the active cares of war and government. If,
      on the other hand, we recollect the universal toleration of
      Polytheism, as it was invariably maintained by the faith of the
      people, the incredulity of philosophers, and the policy of the
      Roman senate and emperors, we are at a loss to discover what new
      offence the Christians had committed, what new provocation could
      exasperate the mild indifference of antiquity, and what new
      motives could urge the Roman princes, who beheld without concern
      a thousand forms of religion subsisting in peace under their
      gentle sway, to inflict a severe punishment on any part of their
      subjects, who had chosen for themselves a singular but an
      inoffensive mode of faith and worship.


      The religious policy of the ancient world seems to have assumed a
      more stern and intolerant character, to oppose the progress of
      Christianity. About fourscore years after the death of Christ,
      his innocent disciples were punished with death by the sentence
      of a proconsul of the most amiable and philosophic character, and
      according to the laws of an emperor distinguished by the wisdom
      and justice of his general administration. The apologies which
      were repeatedly addressed to the successors of Trajan are filled
      with the most pathetic complaints, that the Christians, who
      obeyed the dictates, and solicited the liberty, of conscience,
      were alone, among all the subjects of the Roman empire, excluded
      from the common benefits of their auspicious government. The
      deaths of a few eminent martyrs have been recorded with care; and
      from the time that Christianity was invested with the supreme
      power, the governors of the church have been no less diligently
      employed in displaying the cruelty, than in imitating the
      conduct, of their Pagan adversaries. To separate (if it be
      possible) a few authentic as well as interesting facts from an
      undigested mass of fiction and error, and to relate, in a clear
      and rational manner, the causes, the extent, the duration, and
      the most important circumstances of the persecutions to which the
      first Christians were exposed, is the design of the present
      chapter. 1222


      1222 (return) [ The history of the first age of Christianity is
      only found in the Acts of the Apostles, and in order to speak of
      the first persecutions experienced by the Christians, that book
      should naturally have been consulted; those persecutions, then
      limited to individuals and to a narrow sphere, interested only
      the persecuted, and have been related by them alone. Gibbon
      making the persecutions ascend no higher than Nero, has entirely
      omitted those which preceded this epoch, and of which St. Luke
      has preserved the memory. The only way to justify this omission
      was, to attack the authenticity of the Acts of the Apostles; for,
      if authentic, they must necessarily be consulted and quoted. Now,
      antiquity has left very few works of which the authenticity is so
      well established as that of the Acts of the Apostles. (See
      Lardner’s Cred. of Gospel Hist. part iii.) It is therefore,
      without sufficient reason, that Gibbon has maintained silence
      concerning the narrative of St. Luke, and this omission is not
      without importance.—G.]


      The sectaries of a persecuted religion, depressed by fear
      animated with resentment, and perhaps heated by enthusiasm, are
      seldom in a proper temper of mind calmly to investigate, or
      candidly to appreciate, the motives of their enemies, which often
      escape the impartial and discerning view even of those who are
      placed at a secure distance from the flames of persecution. A
      reason has been assigned for the conduct of the emperors towards
      the primitive Christians, which may appear the more specious and
      probable as it is drawn from the acknowledged genius of
      Polytheism. It has already been observed, that the religious
      concord of the world was principally supported by the implicit
      assent and reverence which the nations of antiquity expressed for
      their respective traditions and ceremonies. It might therefore be
      expected, that they would unite with indignation against any sect
      or people which should separate itself from the communion of
      mankind, and claiming the exclusive possession of divine
      knowledge, should disdain every form of worship, except its own,
      as impious and idolatrous. The rights of toleration were held by
      mutual indulgence: they were justly forfeited by a refusal of the
      accustomed tribute. As the payment of this tribute was inflexibly
      refused by the Jews, and by them alone, the consideration of the
      treatment which they experienced from the Roman magistrates, will
      serve to explain how far these speculations are justified by
      facts, and will lead us to discover the true causes of the
      persecution of Christianity.


      Without repeating what has already been mentioned of the
      reverence of the Roman princes and governors for the temple of
      Jerusalem, we shall only observe, that the destruction of the
      temple and city was accompanied and followed by every
      circumstance that could exasperate the minds of the conquerors,
      and authorize religious persecution by the most specious
      arguments of political justice and the public safety. From the
      reign of Nero to that of Antoninus Pius, the Jews discovered a
      fierce impatience of the dominion of Rome, which repeatedly broke
      out in the most furious massacres and insurrections. Humanity is
      shocked at the recital of the horrid cruelties which they
      committed in the cities of Egypt, of Cyprus, and of Cyrene, where
      they dwelt in treacherous friendship with the unsuspecting
      natives; 1 and we are tempted to applaud the severe retaliation
      which was exercised by the arms of the legions against a race of
      fanatics, whose dire and credulous superstition seemed to render
      them the implacable enemies not only of the Roman government, but
      of human kind. 2 The enthusiasm of the Jews was supported by the
      opinion, that it was unlawful for them to pay taxes to an
      idolatrous master; and by the flattering promise which they
      derived from their ancient oracles, that a conquering Messiah
      would soon arise, destined to break their fetters, and to invest
      the favorites of heaven with the empire of the earth. It was by
      announcing himself as their long-expected deliverer, and by
      calling on all the descendants of Abraham to assert the hope of
      Israel, that the famous Barchochebas collected a formidable army,
      with which he resisted during two years the power of the emperor
      Hadrian. 3


      1 (return) [ In Cyrene, they massacred 220,000 Greeks; in Cyprus,
      240,000; in Egypt, a very great multitude. Many of these unhappy
      victims were sawn asunder, according to a precedent to which
      David had given the sanction of his example. The victorious Jews
      devoured the flesh, licked up the blood, and twisted the entrails
      like a girdle round their bodies. See Dion Cassius, l. lxviii. p.
      1145. * Note: Some commentators, among them Reimar, in his notes
      on Dion Cassius think that the hatred of the Romans against the
      Jews has led the historian to exaggerate the cruelties committed
      by the latter. Don. Cass. lxviii. p. 1146.—G.]


      2 (return) [ Without repeating the well-known narratives of
      Josephus, we may learn from Dion, (l. lxix. p. 1162,) that in
      Hadrian’s war 580,000 Jews were cut off by the sword, besides an
      infinite number which perished by famine, by disease, and by
      fire.]


      3 (return) [ For the sect of the Zealots, see Basnage, Histoire
      des Juifs, l. i. c. 17; for the characters of the Messiah,
      according to the Rabbis, l. v. c. 11, 12, 13; for the actions of
      Barchochebas, l. vii. c. 12. (Hist. of Jews iii. 115, &c.)—M.]


      Notwithstanding these repeated provocations, the resentment of
      the Roman princes expired after the victory; nor were their
      apprehensions continued beyond the period of war and danger. By
      the general indulgence of polytheism, and by the mild temper of
      Antoninus Pius, the Jews were restored to their ancient
      privileges, and once more obtained the permission of circumcising
      their children, with the easy restraint, that they should never
      confer on any foreign proselyte that distinguishing mark of the
      Hebrew race. 4 The numerous remains of that people, though they
      were still excluded from the precincts of Jerusalem, were
      permitted to form and to maintain considerable establishments
      both in Italy and in the provinces, to acquire the freedom of
      Rome, to enjoy municipal honors, and to obtain at the same time
      an exemption from the burdensome and expensive offices of
      society. The moderation or the contempt of the Romans gave a
      legal sanction to the form of ecclesiastical police which was
      instituted by the vanquished sect. The patriarch, who had fixed
      his residence at Tiberias, was empowered to appoint his
      subordinate ministers and apostles, to exercise a domestic
      jurisdiction, and to receive from his dispersed brethren an
      annual contribution. 5 New synagogues were frequently erected in
      the principal cities of the empire; and the sabbaths, the fasts,
      and the festivals, which were either commanded by the Mosaic law,
      or enjoined by the traditions of the Rabbis, were celebrated in
      the most solemn and public manner. 6 Such gentle treatment
      insensibly assuaged the stern temper of the Jews. Awakened from
      their dream of prophecy and conquest, they assumed the behavior
      of peaceable and industrious subjects. Their irreconcilable
      hatred of mankind, instead of flaming out in acts of blood and
      violence, evaporated in less dangerous gratifications. They
      embraced every opportunity of overreaching the idolaters in
      trade; and they pronounced secret and ambiguous imprecations
      against the haughty kingdom of Edom. 7


      4 (return) [ It is to Modestinus, a Roman lawyer (l. vi.
      regular.) that we are indebted for a distinct knowledge of the
      Edict of Antoninus. See Casaubon ad Hist. August. p. 27.]


      5 (return) [ See Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, l. iii. c. 2, 3.
      The office of Patriarch was suppressed by Theodosius the
      younger.]


      6 (return) [ We need only mention the Purim, or deliverance of
      the Jews from he rage of Haman, which, till the reign of
      Theodosius, was celebrated with insolent triumph and riotous
      intemperance. Basnage, Hist. des Juifs, l. vi. c. 17, l. viii. c.
      6.]


      7 (return) [ According to the false Josephus, Tsepho, the
      grandson of Esau, conducted into Italy the army of Eneas, king of
      Carthage. Another colony of Idumæans, flying from the sword of
      David, took refuge in the dominions of Romulus. For these, or for
      other reasons of equal weight, the name of Edom was applied by
      the Jews to the Roman empire. * Note: The false Josephus is a
      romancer of very modern date, though some of these legends are
      probably more ancient. It may be worth considering whether many
      of the stories in the Talmud are not history in a figurative
      disguise, adopted from prudence. The Jews might dare to say many
      things of Rome, under the significant appellation of Edom, which
      they feared to utter publicly. Later and more ignorant ages took
      literally, and perhaps embellished, what was intelligible among
      the generation to which it was addressed. Hist. of Jews, iii.
      131. ——The false Josephus has the inauguration of the emperor,
      with the seven electors and apparently the pope assisting at the
      coronation! Pref. page xxvi.—M.]


      Since the Jews, who rejected with abhorrence the deities adored
      by their sovereign and by their fellow-subjects, enjoyed,
      however, the free exercise of their unsocial religion, there must
      have existed some other cause, which exposed the disciples of
      Christ to those severities from which the posterity of Abraham
      was exempt. The difference between them is simple and obvious;
      but, according to the sentiments of antiquity, it was of the
      highest importance. The Jews were a _nation;_ the Christians were
      a _sect:_ and if it was natural for every community to respect
      the sacred institutions of their neighbors, it was incumbent on
      them to persevere in those of their ancestors. The voice of
      oracles, the precepts of philosophers, and the authority of the
      laws, unanimously enforced this national obligation. By their
      lofty claim of superior sanctity the Jews might provoke the
      Polytheists to consider them as an odious and impure race. By
      disdaining the intercourse of other nations, they might deserve
      their contempt. The laws of Moses might be for the most part
      frivolous or absurd; yet, since they had been received during
      many ages by a large society, his followers were justified by the
      example of mankind; and it was universally acknowledged, that
      they had a right to practise what it would have been criminal in
      them to neglect. But this principle, which protected the Jewish
      synagogue, afforded not any favor or security to the primitive
      church. By embracing the faith of the gospel, the Christians
      incurred the supposed guilt of an unnatural and unpardonable
      offence. They dissolved the sacred ties of custom and education,
      violated the religious institutions of their country, and
      presumptuously despised whatever their fathers had believed as
      true, or had reverenced as sacred. Nor was this apostasy (if we
      may use the expression) merely of a partial or local kind; since
      the pious deserter who withdrew himself from the temples of Egypt
      or Syria, would equally disdain to seek an asylum in those of
      Athens or Carthage. Every Christian rejected with contempt the
      superstitions of his family, his city, and his province. The
      whole body of Christians unanimously refused to hold any
      communion with the gods of Rome, of the empire, and of mankind.
      It was in vain that the oppressed believer asserted the
      inalienable rights of conscience and private judgment. Though his
      situation might excite the pity, his arguments could never reach
      the understanding, either of the philosophic or of the believing
      part of the Pagan world. To their apprehensions, it was no less a
      matter of surprise, that any individuals should entertain
      scruples against complying with the established mode of worship,
      than if they had conceived a sudden abhorrence to the manners,
      the dress, 8111 or the language of their native country. 8


      8 (return) [ From the arguments of Celsus, as they are
      represented and refuted by Origen, (l. v. p. 247—259,) we may
      clearly discover the distinction that was made between the Jewish
      _people_ and the Christian _sect_. See, in the Dialogue of
      Minucius Felix, (c. 5, 6,) a fair and not inelegant description
      of the popular sentiments, with regard to the desertion of the
      established worship.]


      8111 (return) [ In all this there is doubtless much truth; yet
      does not the more important difference lie on the surface? The
      Christians made many converts the Jews but few. Had the Jewish
      been equally a proselyting religion would it not have encountered
      as violent persecution?—M.]


      The surprise of the Pagans was soon succeeded by resentment; and
      the most pious of men were exposed to the unjust but dangerous
      imputation of impiety. Malice and prejudice concurred in
      representing the Christians as a society of atheists, who, by the
      most daring attack on the religious constitution of the empire,
      had merited the severest animadversion of the civil magistrate.
      They had separated themselves (they gloried in the confession)
      from every mode of superstition which was received in any part of
      the globe by the various temper of polytheism: but it was not
      altogether so evident what deity, or what form of worship, they
      had substituted to the gods and temples of antiquity. The pure
      and sublime idea which they entertained of the Supreme Being
      escaped the gross conception of the Pagan multitude, who were at
      a loss to discover a spiritual and solitary God, that was neither
      represented under any corporeal figure or visible symbol, nor was
      adored with the accustomed pomp of libations and festivals, of
      altars and sacrifices. 9 The sages of Greece and Rome, who had
      elevated their minds to the contemplation of the existence and
      attributes of the First Cause, were induced by reason or by
      vanity to reserve for themselves and their chosen disciples the
      privilege of this philosophical devotion. 10 They were far from
      admitting the prejudices of mankind as the standard of truth, but
      they considered them as flowing from the original disposition of
      human nature; and they supposed that any popular mode of faith
      and worship which presumed to disclaim the assistance of the
      senses, would, in proportion as it receded from superstition,
      find itself incapable of restraining the wanderings of the fancy,
      and the visions of fanaticism. The careless glance which men of
      wit and learning condescended to cast on the Christian
      revelation, served only to confirm their hasty opinion, and to
      persuade them that the principle, which they might have revered,
      of the Divine Unity, was defaced by the wild enthusiasm, and
      annihilated by the airy speculations, of the new sectaries. The
      author of a celebrated dialogue, which has been attributed to
      Lucian, whilst he affects to treat the mysterious subject of the
      Trinity in a style of ridicule and contempt, betrays his own
      ignorance of the weakness of human reason, and of the inscrutable
      nature of the divine perfections. 11


      9 (return) [ Cur nullas aras habent? templa nulla? nulla nota
      simulacra!—Unde autem, vel quis ille, aut ubi, Deus unicus,
      solitarius, desti tutus? Minucius Felix, c. 10. The Pagan
      interlocutor goes on to make a distinction in favor of the Jews,
      who had once a temple, altars, victims, &c.]


      10 (return) [ It is difficult (says Plato) to attain, and
      dangerous to publish, the knowledge of the true God. See the
      Theologie des Philosophes, in the Abbé d’Olivet’s French
      translation of Tully de Naturâ Deorum, tom. i. p. 275.]


      11 (return) [ The author of the Philopatris perpetually treats
      the Christians as a company of dreaming enthusiasts, &c.; and in
      one place he manifestly alludes to the vision in which St. Paul
      was transported to the third heaven. In another place, Triephon,
      who personates a Christian, after deriding the gods of Paganism,
      proposes a mysterious oath.]


      It might appear less surprising, that the founder of Christianity
      should not only be revered by his disciples as a sage and a
      prophet, but that he should be adored as a God. The Polytheists
      were disposed to adopt every article of faith, which seemed to
      offer any resemblance, however distant or imperfect, with the
      popular mythology; and the legends of Bacchus, of Hercules, and
      of Æsculapius, had, in some measure, prepared their imagination
      for the appearance of the Son of God under a human form. 12 But
      they were astonished that the Christians should abandon the
      temples of those ancient heroes, who, in the infancy of the
      world, had invented arts, instituted laws, and vanquished the
      tyrants or monsters who infested the earth, in order to choose
      for the exclusive object of their religious worship an obscure
      teacher, who, in a recent age, and among a barbarous people, had
      fallen a sacrifice either to the malice of his own countrymen, or
      to the jealousy of the Roman government. The Pagan multitude,
      reserving their gratitude for temporal benefits alone, rejected
      the inestimable present of life and immortality, which was
      offered to mankind by Jesus of Nazareth. His mild constancy in
      the midst of cruel and voluntary sufferings, his universal
      benevolence, and the sublime simplicity of his actions and
      character, were insufficient, in the opinion of those carnal men,
      to compensate for the want of fame, of empire, and of success;
      and whilst they refused to acknowledge his stupendous triumph
      over the powers of darkness and of the grave, they
      misrepresented, or they insulted, the equivocal birth, wandering
      life, and ignominious death, of the divine Author of
      Christianity. 13


      12 (return) [ According to Justin Martyr, (Apolog. Major, c.
      70-85,) the dæmon who had gained some imperfect knowledge of the
      prophecies, purposely contrived this resemblance, which might
      deter, though by different means, both the people and the
      philosophers from embracing the faith of Christ.]


      13 (return) [ In the first and second books of Origen, Celsus
      treats the birth and character of our Savior with the most
      impious contempt. The orator Libanius praises Porphyry and Julian
      for confuting the folly of a sect., which styles a dead man of
      Palestine, God, and the Son of God. Socrates, Hist. Ecclesiast.
      iii. 23.]


      The personal guilt which every Christian had contracted, in thus
      preferring his private sentiment to the national religion, was
      aggravated in a very high degree by the number and union of the
      criminals. It is well known, and has been already observed, that
      Roman policy viewed with the utmost jealousy and distrust any
      association among its subjects; and that the privileges of
      private corporations, though formed for the most harmless or
      beneficial purposes, were bestowed with a very sparing hand. 14
      The religious assemblies of the Christians who had separated
      themselves from the public worship, appeared of a much less
      innocent nature; they were illegal in their principle, and in
      their consequences might become dangerous; nor were the emperors
      conscious that they violated the laws of justice, when, for the
      peace of society, they prohibited those secret and sometimes
      nocturnal meetings. 15 The pious disobedience of the Christians
      made their conduct, or perhaps their designs, appear in a much
      more serious and criminal light; and the Roman princes, who might
      perhaps have suffered themselves to be disarmed by a ready
      submission, deeming their honor concerned in the execution of
      their commands, sometimes attempted, by rigorous punishments, to
      subdue this independent spirit, which boldly acknowledged an
      authority superior to that of the magistrate. The extent and
      duration of this spiritual conspiracy seemed to render it
      everyday more deserving of his animadversion. We have already
      seen that the active and successful zeal of the Christians had
      insensibly diffused them through every province and almost every
      city of the empire. The new converts seemed to renounce their
      family and country, that they might connect themselves in an
      indissoluble band of union with a peculiar society, which every
      where assumed a different character from the rest of mankind.
      Their gloomy and austere aspect, their abhorrence of the common
      business and pleasures of life, and their frequent predictions of
      impending calamities, 16 inspired the Pagans with the
      apprehension of some danger, which would arise from the new sect,
      the more alarming as it was the more obscure. “Whatever,” says
      Pliny, “may be the principle of their conduct, their inflexible
      obstinacy appeared deserving of punishment.” 17


      14 (return) [ The emperor Trajan refused to incorporate a company
      of 150 firemen, for the use of the city of Nicomedia. He disliked
      all associations. See Plin. Epist. x. 42, 43.]


      15 (return) [ The proconsul Pliny had published a general edict
      against unlawful meetings. The prudence of the Christians
      suspended their Agapæ; but it was impossible for them to omit the
      exercise of public worship.]


      16 (return) [ As the prophecies of the Antichrist, approaching
      conflagration, &c., provoked those Pagans whom they did not
      convert, they were mentioned with caution and reserve; and the
      Montanists were censured for disclosing too freely the dangerous
      secret. See Mosheim, 413.]


      17 (return) [ Neque enim dubitabam, quodcunque esset quod
      faterentur, (such are the words of Pliny,) pervicacian certe et
      inflexibilem obstinationem lebere puniri.]


      The precautions with which the disciples of Christ performed the
      offices of religion were at first dictated by fear and necessity;
      but they were continued from choice. By imitating the awful
      secrecy which reigned in the Eleusinian mysteries, the Christians
      had flattered themselves that they should render their sacred
      institutions more respectable in the eyes of the Pagan world. 18
      But the event, as it often happens to the operations of subtile
      policy, deceived their wishes and their expectations. It was
      concluded, that they only concealed what they would have blushed
      to disclose. Their mistaken prudence afforded an opportunity for
      malice to invent, and for suspicious credulity to believe, the
      horrid tales which described the Christians as the most wicked of
      human kind, who practised in their dark recesses every
      abomination that a depraved fancy could suggest, and who
      solicited the favor of their unknown God by the sacrifice of
      every moral virtue. There were many who pretended to confess or
      to relate the ceremonies of this abhorred society. It was
      asserted, “that a new-born infant, entirely covered over with
      flour, was presented, like some mystic symbol of initiation, to
      the knife of the proselyte, who unknowingly inflicted many a
      secret and mortal wound on the innocent victim of his error; that
      as soon as the cruel deed was perpetrated, the sectaries drank up
      the blood, greedily tore asunder the quivering members, and
      pledged themselves to eternal secrecy, by a mutual consciousness
      of guilt. It was as confidently affirmed, that this inhuman
      sacrifice was succeeded by a suitable entertainment, in which
      intemperance served as a provocative to brutal lust; till, at the
      appointed moment, the lights were suddenly extinguished, shame
      was banished, nature was forgotten; and, as accident might
      direct, the darkness of the night was polluted by the incestuous
      commerce of sisters and brothers, of sons and of mothers.” 19


      18 (return) [ See Mosheim’s Ecclesiastical History, vol. i. p.
      101, and Spanheim, Remarques sur les Cæsars de Julien, p. 468,
      &c.]


      19 (return) [ See Justin Martyr, Apolog. i. 35, ii. 14.
      Athenagoras, in Legation, c. 27. Tertullian, Apolog. c. 7, 8, 9.
      Minucius Felix, c. 9, 10, 80, 31. The last of these writers
      relates the accusation in the most elegant and circumstantial
      manner. The answer of Tertullian is the boldest and most
      vigorous.]


      But the perusal of the ancient apologies was sufficient to remove
      even the slightest suspicion from the mind of a candid adversary.
      The Christians, with the intrepid security of innocence, appeal
      from the voice of rumor to the equity of the magistrates. They
      acknowledge, that if any proof can be produced of the crimes
      which calumny has imputed to them, they are worthy of the most
      severe punishment. They provoke the punishment, and they
      challenge the proof. At the same time they urge, with equal truth
      and propriety, that the charge is not less devoid of probability,
      than it is destitute of evidence; they ask, whether any one can
      seriously believe that the pure and holy precepts of the gospel,
      which so frequently restrain the use of the most lawful
      enjoyments, should inculcate the practice of the most abominable
      crimes; that a large society should resolve to dishonor itself in
      the eyes of its own members; and that a great number of persons
      of either sex, and every age and character, insensible to the
      fear of death or infamy, should consent to violate those
      principles which nature and education had imprinted most deeply
      in their minds. 20 Nothing, it should seem, could weaken the
      force or destroy the effect of so unanswerable a justification,
      unless it were the injudicious conduct of the apologists
      themselves, who betrayed the common cause of religion, to gratify
      their devout hatred to the domestic enemies of the church. It was
      sometimes faintly insinuated, and sometimes boldly asserted, that
      the same bloody sacrifices, and the same incestuous festivals,
      which were so falsely ascribed to the orthodox believers, were in
      reality celebrated by the Marcionites, by the Carpocratians, and
      by several other sects of the Gnostics, who, notwithstanding they
      might deviate into the paths of heresy, were still actuated by
      the sentiments of men, and still governed by the precepts of
      Christianity. 21 Accusations of a similar kind were retorted upon
      the church by the schismatics who had departed from its
      communion, 22 and it was confessed on all sides, that the most
      scandalous licentiousness of manners prevailed among great
      numbers of those who affected the name of Christians. A Pagan
      magistrate, who possessed neither leisure nor abilities to
      discern the almost imperceptible line which divides the orthodox
      faith from heretical pravity, might easily have imagined that
      their mutual animosity had extorted the discovery of their common
      guilt. It was fortunate for the repose, or at least for the
      reputation, of the first Christians, that the magistrates
      sometimes proceeded with more temper and moderation than is
      usually consistent with religious zeal, and that they reported,
      as the impartial result of their judicial inquiry, that the
      sectaries, who had deserted the established worship, appeared to
      them sincere in their professions, and blameless in their
      manners; however they might incur, by their absurd and excessive
      superstition, the censure of the laws. 23


      20 (return) [ In the persecution of Lyons, some Gentile slaves
      were compelled, by the fear of tortures, to accuse their
      Christian master. The church of Lyons, writing to their brethren
      of Asia, treat the horrid charge with proper indignation and
      contempt. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. v. i.]


      21 (return) [ See Justin Martyr, Apolog. i. 35. Irenæus adv.
      Hæres. i. 24. Clemens. Alexandrin. Stromat. l. iii. p. 438.
      Euseb. iv. 8. It would be tedious and disgusting to relate all
      that the succeeding writers have imagined, all that Epiphanius
      has received, and all that Tillemont has copied. M. de Beausobre
      (Hist. du Manicheisme, l. ix. c. 8, 9) has exposed, with great
      spirit, the disingenuous arts of Augustin and Pope Leo I.]


      22 (return) [ When Tertullian became a Montanist, he aspersed the
      morals of the church which he had so resolutely defended. “Sed
      majoris est Agape, quia per hanc adolescentes tui cum sororibus
      dormiunt, appendices scilicet gulæ lascivia et luxuria.” De
      Jejuniis c. 17. The 85th canon of the council of Illiberis
      provides against the scandals which too often polluted the vigils
      of the church, and disgraced the Christian name in the eyes of
      unbelievers.]


      23 (return) [ Tertullian (Apolog. c. 2) expatiates on the fair
      and honorable testimony of Pliny, with much reason and some
      declamation.]


      Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
      Constantine.—Part II.


      History, which undertakes to record the transactions of the past,
      for the instruction of future ages, would ill deserve that
      honorable office, if she condescended to plead the cause of
      tyrants, or to justify the maxims of persecution. It must,
      however, be acknowledged, that the conduct of the emperors who
      appeared the least favorable to the primitive church, is by no
      means so criminal as that of modern sovereigns, who have employed
      the arm of violence and terror against the religious opinions of
      any part of their subjects. From their reflections, or even from
      their own feelings, a Charles V. or a Lewis XIV. might have
      acquired a just knowledge of the rights of conscience, of the
      obligation of faith, and of the innocence of error. But the
      princes and magistrates of ancient Rome were strangers to those
      principles which inspired and authorized the inflexible obstinacy
      of the Christians in the cause of truth, nor could they
      themselves discover in their own breasts any motive which would
      have prompted them to refuse a legal, and as it were a natural,
      submission to the sacred institutions of their country. The same
      reason which contributes to alleviate the guilt, must have tended
      to abate the vigor, of their persecutions. As they were actuated,
      not by the furious zeal of bigots, but by the temperate policy of
      legislators, contempt must often have relaxed, and humanity must
      frequently have suspended, the execution of those laws which they
      enacted against the humble and obscure followers of Christ. From
      the general view of their character and motives we might
      naturally conclude: I. That a considerable time elapsed before
      they considered the new sectaries as an object deserving of the
      attention of government. II. That in the conviction of any of
      their subjects who were accused of so very singular a crime, they
      proceeded with caution and reluctance. III. That they were
      moderate in the use of punishments; and, IV. That the afflicted
      church enjoyed many intervals of peace and tranquility.
      Notwithstanding the careless indifference which the most copious
      and the most minute of the Pagan writers have shown to the
      affairs of the Christians, 24 it may still be in our power to
      confirm each of these probable suppositions, by the evidence of
      authentic facts.


      24 (return) [ In the various compilation of the Augustan History,
      (a part of which was composed under the reign of Constantine,)
      there are not six lines which relate to the Christians; nor has
      the diligence of Xiphilin discovered their name in the large
      history of Dion Cassius. * Note: The greater part of the Augustan
      History is dedicated to Diocletian. This may account for the
      silence of its authors concerning Christianity. The notices that
      occur are almost all in the lives composed under the reign of
      Constantine. It may fairly be concluded, from the language which
      he had into the mouth of Mæcenas, that Dion was an enemy to all
      innovations in religion. (See Gibbon, _infra_, note 105.) In
      fact, when the silence of Pagan historians is noticed, it should
      be remembered how meagre and mutilated are all the extant
      histories of the period—M.]


      1. By the wise dispensation of Providence, a mysterious veil was
      cast over the infancy of the church, which, till the faith of the
      Christians was matured, and their numbers were multiplied, served
      to protect them not only from the malice but even from the
      knowledge of the Pagan world. The slow and gradual abolition of
      the Mosaic ceremonies afforded a safe and innocent disguise to
      the more early proselytes of the gospel. As they were, for the
      greater part, of the race of Abraham, they were distinguished by
      the peculiar mark of circumcision, offered up their devotions in
      the Temple of Jerusalem till its final destruction, and received
      both the Law and the Prophets as the genuine inspirations of the
      Deity. The Gentile converts, who by a spiritual adoption had been
      associated to the hope of Israel, were likewise confounded under
      the garb and appearance of Jews, 25 and as the Polytheists paid
      less regard to articles of faith than to the external worship,
      the new sect, which carefully concealed, or faintly announced,
      its future greatness and ambition, was permitted to shelter
      itself under the general toleration which was granted to an
      ancient and celebrated people in the Roman empire. It was not
      long, perhaps, before the Jews themselves, animated with a
      fiercer zeal and a more jealous faith, perceived the gradual
      separation of their Nazarene brethren from the doctrine of the
      synagogue; and they would gladly have extinguished the dangerous
      heresy in the blood of its adherents. But the decrees of Heaven
      had already disarmed their malice; and though they might
      sometimes exert the licentious privilege of sedition, they no
      longer possessed the administration of criminal justice; nor did
      they find it easy to infuse into the calm breast of a Roman
      magistrate the rancor of their own zeal and prejudice. The
      provincial governors declared themselves ready to listen to any
      accusation that might affect the public safety; but as soon as
      they were informed that it was a question not of facts but of
      words, a dispute relating only to the interpretation of the
      Jewish laws and prophecies, they deemed it unworthy of the
      majesty of Rome seriously to discuss the obscure differences
      which might arise among a barbarous and superstitious people. The
      innocence of the first Christians was protected by ignorance and
      contempt; and the tribunal of the Pagan magistrate often proved
      their most assured refuge against the fury of the synagogue. 26
      If indeed we were disposed to adopt the traditions of a too
      credulous antiquity, we might relate the distant peregrinations,
      the wonderful achievements, and the various deaths of the twelve
      apostles: but a more accurate inquiry will induce us to doubt,
      whether any of those persons who had been witnesses to the
      miracles of Christ were permitted, beyond the limits of
      Palestine, to seal with their blood the truth of their testimony.
      27 From the ordinary term of human life, it may very naturally be
      presumed that most of them were deceased before the discontent of
      the Jews broke out into that furious war, which was terminated
      only by the ruin of Jerusalem. During a long period, from the
      death of Christ to that memorable rebellion, we cannot discover
      any traces of Roman intolerance, unless they are to be found in
      the sudden, the transient, but the cruel persecution, which was
      exercised by Nero against the Christians of the capital,
      thirty-five years after the former, and only two years before the
      latter, of those great events. The character of the philosophic
      historian, to whom we are principally indebted for the knowledge
      of this singular transaction, would alone be sufficient to
      recommend it to our most attentive consideration.


      25 (return) [ An obscure passage of Suetonius (in Claud. c. 25)
      may seem to offer a proof how strangely the Jews and Christians
      of Rome were confounded with each other.]


      26 (return) [ See, in the xviiith and xxvth chapters of the Acts
      of the Apostles, the behavior of Gallio, proconsul of Achaia, and
      of Festus, procurator of Judea.]


      27 (return) [ In the time of Tertullian and Clemens of
      Alexandria, the glory of martyrdom was confined to St. Peter, St.
      Paul, and St. James. It was gradually bestowed on the rest of the
      apostles, by the more recent Greeks, who prudently selected for
      the theatre of their preaching and sufferings some remote country
      beyond the limits of the Roman empire. See Mosheim, p. 81; and
      Tillemont, Mémoires Ecclésiastiques, tom. i. part iii.]


      In the tenth year of the reign of Nero, the capital of the empire
      was afflicted by a fire which raged beyond the memory or example
      of former ages. 28 The monuments of Grecian art and of Roman
      virtue, the trophies of the Punic and Gallic wars, the most holy
      temples, and the most splendid palaces, were involved in one
      common destruction. Of the fourteen regions or quarters into
      which Rome was divided, four only subsisted entire, three were
      levelled with the ground, and the remaining seven, which had
      experienced the fury of the flames, displayed a melancholy
      prospect of ruin and desolation. The vigilance of government
      appears not to have neglected any of the precautions which might
      alleviate the sense of so dreadful a calamity. The Imperial
      gardens were thrown open to the distressed multitude, temporary
      buildings were erected for their accommodation, and a plentiful
      supply of corn and provisions was distributed at a very moderate
      price. 29 The most generous policy seemed to have dictated the
      edicts which regulated the disposition of the streets and the
      construction of private houses; and as it usually happens, in an
      age of prosperity, the conflagration of Rome, in the course of a
      few years, produced a new city, more regular and more beautiful
      than the former. But all the prudence and humanity affected by
      Nero on this occasion were insufficient to preserve him from the
      popular suspicion. Every crime might be imputed to the assassin
      of his wife and mother; nor could the prince who prostituted his
      person and dignity on the theatre be deemed incapable of the most
      extravagant folly. The voice of rumor accused the emperor as the
      incendiary of his own capital; and as the most incredible stories
      are the best adapted to the genius of an enraged people, it was
      gravely reported, and firmly believed, that Nero, enjoying the
      calamity which he had occasioned, amused himself with singing to
      his lyre the destruction of ancient Troy. 30 To divert a
      suspicion, which the power of despotism was unable to suppress,
      the emperor resolved to substitute in his own place some
      fictitious criminals. “With this view,” continues Tacitus, “he
      inflicted the most exquisite tortures on those men, who, under
      the vulgar appellation of Christians, were already branded with
      deserved infamy. They derived their name and origin from Christ,
      who in the reign of Tiberius had suffered death by the sentence
      of the procurator Pontius Pilate. 31 For a while this dire
      superstition was checked; but it again burst forth; 3111 and not
      only spread itself over Judæa, the first seat of this mischievous
      sect, but was even introduced into Rome, the common asylum which
      receives and protects whatever is impure, whatever is atrocious.
      The confessions of those who were seized discovered a great
      multitude of their accomplices, and they were all convicted, not
      so much for the crime of setting fire to the city, as for their
      hatred of human kind. 32 They died in torments, and their
      torments were imbittered by insult and derision. Some were nailed
      on crosses; others sewn up in the skins of wild beasts, and
      exposed to the fury of dogs; others again, smeared over with
      combustible materials, were used as torches to illuminate the
      darkness of the night. The gardens of Nero were destined for the
      melancholy spectacle, which was accompanied with a horse-race and
      honored with the presence of the emperor, who mingled with the
      populace in the dress and attitude of a charioteer. The guilt of
      the Christians deserved indeed the most exemplary punishment, but
      the public abhorrence was changed into commiseration, from the
      opinion that those unhappy wretches were sacrificed, not so much
      to the public welfare, as to the cruelty of a jealous tyrant.” 33
      Those who survey with a curious eye the revolutions of mankind,
      may observe, that the gardens and circus of Nero on the Vatican,
      which were polluted with the blood of the first Christians, have
      been rendered still more famous by the triumph and by the abuse
      of the persecuted religion. On the same spot, 34 a temple, which
      far surpasses the ancient glories of the Capitol, has been since
      erected by the Christian Pontiffs, who, deriving their claim of
      universal dominion from an humble fisherman of Galilee, have
      succeeded to the throne of the Cæsars, given laws to the
      barbarian conquerors of Rome, and extended their spiritual
      jurisdiction from the coast of the Baltic to the shores of the
      Pacific Ocean.


      28 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xv. 38—44. Sueton in Neron. c. 38.
      Dion Cassius, l. lxii. p. 1014. Orosius, vii. 7.]


      29 (return) [ The price of wheat (probably of the _modius_,) was
      reduced as low as _terni Nummi;_ which would be equivalent to
      about fifteen shillings the English quarter.]


      30 (return) [ We may observe, that the rumor is mentioned by
      Tacitus with a very becoming distrust and hesitation, whilst it
      is greedily transcribed by Suetonius, and solemnly confirmed by
      Dion.]


      31 (return) [ This testimony is alone sufficient to expose the
      anachronism of the Jews, who place the birth of Christ near a
      century sooner. (Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, l. v. c. 14, 15.)
      We may learn from Josephus, (Antiquitat. xviii. 3,) that the
      procuratorship of Pilate corresponded with the last ten years of
      Tiberius, A. D. 27—37. As to the particular time of the death of
      Christ, a very early tradition fixed it to the 25th of March, A.
      D. 29, under the consulship of the two Gemini. (Tertullian adv.
      Judæos, c. 8.) This date, which is adopted by Pagi, Cardinal
      Norris, and Le Clerc, seems at least as probable as the vulgar
      æra, which is placed (I know not from what conjectures) four
      years later.]


      3111 (return) [ This single phrase, Repressa in præsens
      exitiabilis superstitio rursus erumpebat, proves that the
      Christians had already attracted the attention of the government;
      and that Nero was not the first to persecute them. I am surprised
      that more stress has not been laid on the confirmation which the
      Acts of the Apostles derive from these words of Tacitus, Repressa
      in præsens, and rursus erumpebat.—G. ——I have been unwilling to
      suppress this note, but surely the expression of Tacitus refers
      to the expected extirpation of the religion by the death of its
      founder, Christ.—M.]


      32 (return) [ _Odio humani generis convicti_. These words may
      either signify the hatred of mankind towards the Christians, or
      the hatred of the Christians towards mankind. I have preferred
      the latter sense, as the most agreeable to the style of Tacitus,
      and to the popular error, of which a precept of the gospel (see
      Luke xiv. 26) had been, perhaps, the innocent occasion. My
      interpretation is justified by the authority of Lipsius; of the
      Italian, the French, and the English translators of Tacitus; of
      Mosheim, (p. 102,) of Le Clerc, (Historia Ecclesiast. p. 427,) of
      Dr. Lardner, (Testimonies, vol. i. p. 345,) and of the Bishop of
      Gloucester, (Divine Legation, vol. iii. p. 38.) But as the word
      _convicti_ does not unite very happily with the rest of the
      sentence, James Gronovius has preferred the reading of
      _conjuncti_, which is authorized by the valuable MS. of
      Florence.]


      33 (return) [ Tacit. Annal xv. 44.]


      34 (return) [ Nardini Roma Antica, p. 487. Donatus de Roma
      Antiqua, l. iii. p. 449.]


      But it would be improper to dismiss this account of Nero’s
      persecution, till we have made some observations that may serve
      to remove the difficulties with which it is perplexed, and to
      throw some light on the subsequent history of the church.


      1. The most sceptical criticism is obliged to respect the truth
      of this extraordinary fact, and the integrity of this celebrated
      passage of Tacitus. The former is confirmed by the diligent and
      accurate Suetonius, who mentions the punishment which Nero
      inflicted on the Christians, a sect of men who had embraced a new
      and criminal superstition. 35 The latter may be proved by the
      consent of the most ancient manuscripts; by the inimitable
      character of the style of Tacitus by his reputation, which
      guarded his text from the interpolations of pious fraud; and by
      the purport of his narration, which accused the first Christians
      of the most atrocious crimes, without insinuating that they
      possessed any miraculous or even magical powers above the rest of
      mankind. 36 2. Notwithstanding it is probable that Tacitus was
      born some years before the fire of Rome, 37 he could derive only
      from reading and conversation the knowledge of an event which
      happened during his infancy. Before he gave himself to the
      public, he calmly waited till his genius had attained its full
      maturity, and he was more than forty years of age, when a
      grateful regard for the memory of the virtuous Agricola extorted
      from him the most early of those historical compositions which
      will delight and instruct the most distant posterity. After
      making a trial of his strength in the life of Agricola and the
      description of Germany, he conceived, and at length executed, a
      more arduous work; the history of Rome, in thirty books, from the
      fall of Nero to the accession of Nerva. The administration of
      Nerva introduced an age of justice and propriety, which Tacitus
      had destined for the occupation of his old age; 38 but when he
      took a nearer view of his subject, judging, perhaps, that it was
      a more honorable or a less invidious office to record the vices
      of past tyrants, than to celebrate the virtues of a reigning
      monarch, he chose rather to relate, under the form of annals, the
      actions of the four immediate successors of Augustus. To collect,
      to dispose, and to adorn a series of fourscore years, in an
      immortal work, every sentence of which is pregnant with the
      deepest observations and the most lively images, was an
      undertaking sufficient to exercise the genius of Tacitus himself
      during the greatest part of his life. In the last years of the
      reign of Trajan, whilst the victorious monarch extended the power
      of Rome beyond its ancient limits, the historian was describing,
      in the second and fourth books of his annals, the tyranny of
      Tiberius; 39 and the emperor Hadrian must have succeeded to the
      throne, before Tacitus, in the regular prosecution of his work,
      could relate the fire of the capital, and the cruelty of Nero
      towards the unfortunate Christians. At the distance of sixty
      years, it was the duty of the annalist to adopt the narratives of
      contemporaries; but it was natural for the philosopher to indulge
      himself in the description of the origin, the progress, and the
      character of the new sect, not so much according to the knowledge
      or prejudices of the age of Nero, as according to those of the
      time of Hadrian. 3 Tacitus very frequently trusts to the
      curiosity or reflection of his readers to supply those
      intermediate circumstances and ideas, which, in his extreme
      conciseness, he has thought proper to suppress. We may therefore
      presume to imagine some probable cause which could direct the
      cruelty of Nero against the Christians of Rome, whose obscurity,
      as well as innocence, should have shielded them from his
      indignation, and even from his notice. The Jews, who were
      numerous in the capital, and oppressed in their own country, were
      a much fitter object for the suspicions of the emperor and of the
      people: nor did it seem unlikely that a vanquished nation, who
      already discovered their abhorrence of the Roman yoke, might have
      recourse to the most atrocious means of gratifying their
      implacable revenge. But the Jews possessed very powerful
      advocates in the palace, and even in the heart of the tyrant; his
      wife and mistress, the beautiful Poppæa, and a favorite player of
      the race of Abraham, who had already employed their intercession
      in behalf of the obnoxious people. 40 In their room it was
      necessary to offer some other victims, and it might easily be
      suggested that, although the genuine followers of Moses were
      innocent of the fire of Rome, there had arisen among them a new
      and pernicious sect of Galilæans, which was capable of the most
      horrid crimes. Under the appellation of Galilæans, two
      distinctions of men were confounded, the most opposite to each
      other in their manners and principles; the disciples who had
      embraced the faith of Jesus of Nazareth, 41 and the zealots who
      had followed the standard of Judas the Gaulonite. 42 The former
      were the friends, the latter were the enemies, of human kind; and
      the only resemblance between them consisted in the same
      inflexible constancy, which, in the defence of their cause,
      rendered them insensible of death and tortures. The followers of
      Judas, who impelled their countrymen into rebellion, were soon
      buried under the ruins of Jerusalem; whilst those of Jesus, known
      by the more celebrated name of Christians, diffused themselves
      over the Roman empire. How natural was it for Tacitus, in the
      time of Hadrian, to appropriate to the Christians the guilt and
      the sufferings, 4211 which he might, with far greater truth and
      justice, have attributed to a sect whose odious memory was almost
      extinguished! 4. Whatever opinion may be entertained of this
      conjecture, (for it is no more than a conjecture,) it is evident
      that the effect, as well as the cause, of Nero’s persecution, was
      confined to the walls of Rome, 43 that the religious tenets of
      the Galilæans or Christians, 431 were never made a subject of
      punishment, or even of inquiry; and that, as the idea of their
      sufferings was for a long time connected with the idea of cruelty
      and injustice, the moderation of succeeding princes inclined them
      to spare a sect, oppressed by a tyrant, whose rage had been
      usually directed against virtue and innocence.


      35 (return) [ Sueton. in Nerone, c. 16. The epithet of
      _malefica_, which some sagacious commentators have translated
      magical, is considered by the more rational Mosheim as only
      synonymous to the _exitiabilis_ of Tacitus.]


      36 (return) [ The passage concerning Jesus Christ, which was
      inserted into the text of Josephus, between the time of Origen
      and that of Eusebius, may furnish an example of no vulgar
      forgery. The accomplishment of the prophecies, the virtues,
      miracles, and resurrection of Jesus, are distinctly related.
      Josephus acknowledges that he was the Messiah, and hesitates
      whether he should call him a man. If any doubt can still remain
      concerning this celebrated passage, the reader may examine the
      pointed objections of Le Fevre, (Havercamp. Joseph. tom. ii. p.
      267-273), the labored answers of Daubuz, (p. 187-232, and the
      masterly reply (Bibliothèque Ancienne et Moderne, tom. vii. p.
      237-288) of an anonymous critic, whom I believe to have been the
      learned Abbé de Longuerue. * Note: The modern editor of Eusebius,
      Heinichen, has adopted, and ably supported, a notion, which had
      before suggested itself to the editor, that this passage is not
      altogether a forgery, but interpolated with many additional
      clauses. Heinichen has endeavored to disengage the original text
      from the foreign and more recent matter.—M.]


      37 (return) [ See the lives of Tacitus by Lipsius and the Abbé de
      la Bleterie, Dictionnaire de Bayle a l’article Particle Tacite,
      and Fabricius, Biblioth. Latin tem. Latin. tom. ii. p. 386, edit.
      Ernest. Ernst.]


      38 (return) [ Principatum Divi Nervæ, et imperium Trajani,
      uberiorem, securioremque materiam senectuti seposui. Tacit. Hist.
      i.]


      39 (return) [ See Tacit. Annal. ii. 61, iv. 4. * Note: The
      perusal of this passage of Tacitus alone is sufficient, as I have
      already said, to show that the Christian sect was not so obscure
      as not already to have been repressed, (repressa,) and that it
      did not pass for innocent in the eyes of the Romans.—G.]


      40 (return) [ The player’s name was Aliturus. Through the same
      channel, Josephus, (de vitâ suâ, c. 2,) about two years before,
      had obtained the pardon and release of some Jewish priests, who
      were prisoners at Rome.]


      41 (return) [ The learned Dr. Lardner (Jewish and Heathen
      Testimonies, vol ii. p. 102, 103) has proved that the name of
      Galilæans was a very ancient, and perhaps the primitive
      appellation of the Christians.]


      42 (return) [ Joseph. Antiquitat. xviii. 1, 2. Tillemont, Ruine
      des Juifs, p. 742 The sons of Judas were crucified in the time of
      Claudius. His grandson Eleazar, after Jerusalem was taken,
      defended a strong fortress with 960 of his most desperate
      followers. When the battering ram had made a breach, they turned
      their swords against their wives their children, and at length
      against their own breasts. They dies to the last man.]


      4211 (return) [ This conjecture is entirely devoid, not merely of
      verisimilitude, but even of possibility. Tacitus could not be
      deceived in appropriating to the Christians of Rome the guilt and
      the sufferings which he might have attributed with far greater
      truth to the followers of Judas the Gaulonite, for the latter
      never went to Rome. Their revolt, their attempts, their opinions,
      their wars, their punishment, had no other theatre but Judæa
      (Basn. Hist. des. Juifs, t. i. p. 491.) Moreover the name of
      Christians had long been given in Rome to the disciples of Jesus;
      and Tacitus affirms too positively, refers too distinctly to its
      etymology, to allow us to suspect any mistake on his part.—G.
      ——M. Guizot’s expressions are not in the least too strong against
      this strange imagination of Gibbon; it may be doubted whether the
      followers of Judas were known as a sect under the name of
      Galilæans.—M.]


      43 (return) [ See Dodwell. Paucitat. Mart. l. xiii. The Spanish
      Inscription in Gruter. p. 238, No. 9, is a manifest and
      acknowledged forgery contrived by that noted imposter. Cyriacus
      of Ancona, to flatter the pride and prejudices of the Spaniards.
      See Ferreras, Histoire D’Espagne, tom. i. p. 192.]


      431 (return) [ M. Guizot, on the authority of Sulpicius Severus,
      ii. 37, and of Orosius, viii. 5, inclines to the opinion of those
      who extend the persecution to the provinces. Mosheim rather leans
      to that side on this much disputed question, (c. xxxv.) Neander
      takes the view of Gibbon, which is in general that of the most
      learned writers. There is indeed no evidence, which I can
      discover, of its reaching the provinces; and the apparent
      security, at least as regards his life, with which St. Paul
      pursued his travels during this period, affords at least a strong
      inference against a rigid and general inquisition against the
      Christians in other parts of the empire.—M.]


      It is somewhat remarkable that the flames of war consumed, almost
      at the same time, the temple of Jerusalem and the Capitol of
      Rome; 44 and it appears no less singular, that the tribute which
      devotion had destined to the former, should have been converted
      by the power of an assaulting victor to restore and adorn the
      splendor of the latter. 45 The emperors levied a general
      capitation tax on the Jewish people; and although the sum
      assessed on the head of each individual was inconsiderable, the
      use for which it was designed, and the severity with which it was
      exacted, were considered as an intolerable grievance. 46 Since
      the officers of the revenue extended their unjust claim to many
      persons who were strangers to the blood or religion of the Jews,
      it was impossible that the Christians, who had so often sheltered
      themselves under the shade of the synagogue, should now escape
      this rapacious persecution. Anxious as they were to avoid the
      slightest infection of idolatry, their conscience forbade them to
      contribute to the honor of that dæmon who had assumed the
      character of the Capitoline Jupiter. As a very numerous though
      declining party among the Christians still adhered to the law of
      Moses, their efforts to dissemble their Jewish origin were
      detected by the decisive test of circumcision; 47 nor were the
      Roman magistrates at leisure to inquire into the difference of
      their religious tenets. Among the Christians who were brought
      before the tribunal of the emperor, or, as it seems more
      probable, before that of the procurator of Judæa, two persons are
      said to have appeared, distinguished by their extraction, which
      was more truly noble than that of the greatest monarchs. These
      were the grandsons of St. Jude the apostle, who himself was the
      brother of Jesus Christ. 48 Their natural pretensions to the
      throne of David might perhaps attract the respect of the people,
      and excite the jealousy of the governor; but the meanness of
      their garb, and the simplicity of their answers, soon convinced
      him that they were neither desirous nor capable of disturbing the
      peace of the Roman empire. They frankly confessed their royal
      origin, and their near relation to the Messiah; but they
      disclaimed any temporal views, and professed that his kingdom,
      which they devoutly expected, was purely of a spiritual and
      angelic nature. When they were examined concerning their fortune
      and occupation, they showed their hands, hardened with daily
      labor, and declared that they derived their whole subsistence
      from the cultivation of a farm near the village of Cocaba, of the
      extent of about twenty-four English acres, 49 and of the value of
      nine thousand drachms, or three hundred pounds sterling. The
      grandsons of St. Jude were dismissed with compassion and
      contempt. 50


      44 (return) [ The Capitol was burnt during the civil war between
      Vitellius and Vespasian, the 19th of December, A. D. 69. On the
      10th of August, A. D. 70, the temple of Jerusalem was destroyed
      by the hands of the Jews themselves, rather than by those of the
      Romans.]


      45 (return) [ The new Capitol was dedicated by Domitian. Sueton.
      in Domitian. c. 5. Plutarch in Poplicola, tom. i. p. 230, edit.
      Bryant. The gilding alone cost 12,000 talents (above two millions
      and a half.) It was the opinion of Martial, (l. ix. Epigram 3,)
      that if the emperor had called in his debts, Jupiter himself,
      even though he had made a general auction of Olympus, would have
      been unable to pay two shillings in the pound.]


      46 (return) [ With regard to the tribute, see Dion Cassius, l.
      lxvi. p. 1082, with Reimarus’s notes. Spanheim, de Usu
      Numismatum, tom. ii. p. 571; and Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, l.
      vii. c. 2.]


      47 (return) [ Suetonius (in Domitian. c. 12) had seen an old man
      of ninety publicly examined before the procurator’s tribunal.
      This is what Martial calls, Mentula tributis damnata.]


      48 (return) [ This appellation was at first understood in the
      most obvious sense, and it was supposed, that the brothers of
      Jesus were the lawful issue of Joseph and Mary. A devout respect
      for the virginity of the mother of God suggested to the Gnostics,
      and afterwards to the orthodox Greeks, the expedient of bestowing
      a second wife on Joseph. The Latins (from the time of Jerome)
      improved on that hint, asserted the perpetual celibacy of Joseph,
      and justified by many similar examples the new interpretation
      that Jude, as well as Simon and James, who were styled the
      brothers of Jesus Christ, were only his first cousins. See
      Tillemont, Mém. Ecclesiast. tom. i. part iii.: and Beausobre,
      Hist. Critique du Manicheisme, l. ii. c. 2.]


      49 (return) [ Thirty-nine, squares of a hundred feet each, which,
      if strictly computed, would scarcely amount to nine acres.]


      50 (return) [ Eusebius, iii. 20. The story is taken from
      Hegesippus.]


      But although the obscurity of the house of David might protect
      them from the suspicions of a tyrant, the present greatness of
      his own family alarmed the pusillanimous temper of Domitian,
      which could only be appeased by the blood of those Romans whom he
      either feared, or hated, or esteemed. Of the two sons of his
      uncle Flavius Sabinus, 51 the elder was soon convicted of
      treasonable intentions, and the younger, who bore the name of
      Flavius Clemens, was indebted for his safety to his want of
      courage and ability. 52 The emperor for a long time,
      distinguished so harmless a kinsman by his favor and protection,
      bestowed on him his own niece Domitilla, adopted the children of
      that marriage to the hope of the succession, and invested their
      father with the honors of the consulship.


      51 (return) [ See the death and character of Sabinus in Tacitus,
      (Hist. iii. 74 ) Sabinus was the elder brother, and, till the
      accession of Vespasian, had been considered as the principal
      support of the Flavium family]


      52 (return) [ Flavium Clementem patruelem suum _contemptissimæ
      inertiæ_.. ex tenuissimâ suspicione interemit. Sueton. in
      Domitian. c. 15.]


      But he had scarcely finished the term of his annual magistracy,
      when, on a slight pretence, he was condemned and executed;
      Domitilla was banished to a desolate island on the coast of
      Campania; 53 and sentences either of death or of confiscation
      were pronounced against a great number of who were involved in
      the same accusation. The guilt imputed to their charge was that
      of _Atheism_ and _Jewish manners;_ 54 a singular association of
      ideas, which cannot with any propriety be applied except to the
      Christians, as they were obscurely and imperfectly viewed by the
      magistrates and by the writers of that period. On the strength of
      so probable an interpretation, and too eagerly admitting the
      suspicions of a tyrant as an evidence of their honorable crime,
      the church has placed both Clemens and Domitilla among its first
      martyrs, and has branded the cruelty of Domitian with the name of
      the second persecution. But this persecution (if it deserves that
      epithet) was of no long duration. A few months after the death of
      Clemens, and the banishment of Domitilla, Stephen, a freedman
      belonging to the latter, who had enjoyed the favor, but who had
      not surely embraced the faith, of his mistress, 5411 assassinated
      the emperor in his palace. 55 The memory of Domitian was
      condemned by the senate; his acts were rescinded; his exiles
      recalled; and under the gentle administration of Nerva, while the
      innocent were restored to their rank and fortunes, even the most
      guilty either obtained pardon or escaped punishment. 56


      53 (return) [ The Isle of Pandataria, according to Dion. Bruttius
      Præsens (apud Euseb. iii. 18) banishes her to that of Pontia,
      which was not far distant from the other. That difference, and a
      mistake, either of Eusebius or of his transcribers, have given
      occasion to suppose two Domitillas, the wife and the niece of
      Clemens. See Tillemont, Mémoires Ecclésiastiques, tom. ii. p.
      224.]


      54 (return) [ Dion. l. lxvii. p. 1112. If the Bruttius Præsens,
      from whom it is probable that he collected this account, was the
      correspondent of Pliny, (Epistol. vii. 3,) we may consider him as
      a contemporary writer.]


      5411 (return) [ This is an uncandid sarcasm. There is nothing to
      connect Stephen with the religion of Domitilla. He was a knave
      detected in the malversation of money—interceptarum pecuniaram
      reus.—M.]


      55 (return) [ Suet. in Domit. c. 17. Philostratus in Vit.
      Apollon. l. viii.]


      56 (return) [ Dion. l. lxviii. p. 1118. Plin. Epistol. iv. 22.]


      II. About ten years afterwards, under the reign of Trajan, the
      younger Pliny was intrusted by his friend and master with the
      government of Bithynia and Pontus. He soon found himself at a
      loss to determine by what rule of justice or of law he should
      direct his conduct in the execution of an office the most
      repugnant to his humanity. Pliny had never assisted at any
      judicial proceedings against the Christians, with whose name
      alone he seems to be acquainted; and he was totally uninformed
      with regard to the nature of their guilt, the method of their
      conviction, and the degree of their punishment. In this
      perplexity he had recourse to his usual expedient, of submitting
      to the wisdom of Trajan an impartial, and, in some respects, a
      favorable account of the new superstition, requesting the
      emperor, that he would condescend to resolve his doubts, and to
      instruct his ignorance. 57 The life of Pliny had been employed in
      the acquisition of learning, and in the business of the world.


      Since the age of nineteen he had pleaded with distinction in the
      tribunals of Rome, 58 filled a place in the senate, had been
      invested with the honors of the consulship, and had formed very
      numerous connections with every order of men, both in Italy and
      in the provinces. From _his_ ignorance therefore we may derive
      some useful information. We may assure ourselves, that when he
      accepted the government of Bithynia, there were no general laws
      or decrees of the senate in force against the Christians; that
      neither Trajan nor any of his virtuous predecessors, whose edicts
      were received into the civil and criminal jurisprudence, had
      publicly declared their intentions concerning the new sect; and
      that whatever proceedings had been carried on against the
      Christians, there were none of sufficient weight and authority to
      establish a precedent for the conduct of a Roman magistrate.


      57 (return) [ Plin. Epistol. x. 97. The learned Mosheim expresses
      himself (p. 147, 232) with the highest approbation of Pliny’s
      moderate and candid temper. Notwithstanding Dr. Lardner’s
      suspicions (see Jewish and Heathen Testimonies, vol. ii. p. 46,)
      I am unable to discover any bigotry in his language or
      proceedings. * Note: Yet the humane Pliny put two female
      attendants, probably deaconesses to the torture, in order to
      ascertain the real nature of these suspicious meetings:
      necessarium credidi, ex duabus ancillis, quæ ministræ dicebantor
      quid asset veri et _per tormenta_ quærere.—M.]


      58 (return) [ Plin. Epist. v. 8. He pleaded his first cause A. D.
      81; the year after the famous eruptions of Mount Vesuvius, in
      which his uncle lost his life.]


      Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
      Constantine.—Part III.


      The answer of Trajan, to which the Christians of the succeeding
      age have frequently appealed, discovers as much regard for
      justice and humanity as could be reconciled with his mistaken
      notions of religious policy. 59 Instead of displaying the
      implacable zeal of an inquisitor, anxious to discover the most
      minute particles of heresy, and exulting in the number of his
      victims, the emperor expresses much more solicitude to protect
      the security of the innocent, than to prevent the escape of the
      guilty. He acknowledged the difficulty of fixing any general
      plan; but he lays down two salutary rules, which often afforded
      relief and support to the distressed Christians. Though he
      directs the magistrates to punish such persons as are legally
      convicted, he prohibits them, with a very humane inconsistency,
      from making any inquiries concerning the supposed criminals. Nor
      was the magistrate allowed to proceed on every kind of
      information. Anonymous charges the emperor rejects, as too
      repugnant to the equity of his government; and he strictly
      requires, for the conviction of those to whom the guilt of
      Christianity is imputed, the positive evidence of a fair and open
      accuser. It is likewise probable, that the persons who assumed so
      invidiuous an office, were obliged to declare the grounds of
      their suspicions, to specify (both in respect to time and place)
      the secret assemblies, which their Christian adversary had
      frequented, and to disclose a great number of circumstances,
      which were concealed with the most vigilant jealousy from the eye
      of the profane. If they succeeded in their prosecution, they were
      exposed to the resentment of a considerable and active party, to
      the censure of the more liberal portion of mankind, and to the
      ignominy which, in every age and country, has attended the
      character of an informer. If, on the contrary, they failed in
      their proofs, they incurred the severe and perhaps capital
      penalty, which, according to a law published by the emperor
      Hadrian, was inflicted on those who falsely attributed to their
      fellow-citizens the crime of Christianity. The violence of
      personal or superstitious animosity might sometimes prevail over
      the most natural apprehensions of disgrace and danger but it
      cannot surely be imagined, 60 that accusations of so unpromising
      an appearance were either lightly or frequently undertaken by the
      Pagan subjects of the Roman empire. 6011


      59 (return) [ Plin. Epist. x. 98. Tertullian (Apolog. c. 5)
      considers this rescript as a relaxation of the ancient penal
      laws, “quas Trajanus exparte frustratus est:” and yet Tertullian,
      in another part of his Apology, exposes the inconsistency of
      prohibiting inquiries, and enjoining punishments.]


      60 (return) [ Eusebius (Hist. Ecclesiast. l. iv. c. 9) has
      preserved the edict of Hadrian. He has likewise (c. 13) given us
      one still more favorable, under the name of Antoninus; the
      authenticity of which is not so universally allowed. The second
      Apology of Justin contains some curious particulars relative to
      the accusations of Christians. * Note: Professor Hegelmayer has
      proved the authenticity of the edict of Antoninus, in his Comm.
      Hist. Theol. in Edict. Imp. Antonini. Tubing. 1777, in 4to.—G.
      ——Neander doubts its authenticity, (vol. i. p. 152.) In my
      opinion, the internal evidence is decisive against it.—M]


      6011 (return) [ The enactment of this law affords strong
      presumption, that accusations of the “crime of Christianity,”
      were by no means so uncommon, nor received with so much mistrust
      and caution by the ruling authorities, as Gibbon would insinuate.
      —M.]


      The expedient which was employed to elude the prudence of the
      laws, affords a sufficient proof how effectually they
      disappointed the mischievous designs of private malice or
      superstitious zeal. In a large and tumultuous assembly, the
      restraints of fear and shame, so forcible on the minds of
      individuals, are deprived of the greatest part of their
      influence. The pious Christian, as he was desirous to obtain, or
      to escape, the glory of martyrdom, expected, either with
      impatience or with terror, the stated returns of the public games
      and festivals. On those occasions the inhabitants of the great
      cities of the empire were collected in the circus or the theatre,
      where every circumstance of the place, as well as of the
      ceremony, contributed to kindle their devotion, and to extinguish
      their humanity. Whilst the numerous spectators, crowned with
      garlands, perfumed with incense, purified with the blood of
      victims, and surrounded with the altars and statues of their
      tutelar deities, resigned themselves to the enjoyment of
      pleasures, which they considered as an essential part of their
      religious worship, they recollected, that the Christians alone
      abhorred the gods of mankind, and by their absence and melancholy
      on these solemn festivals, seemed to insult or to lament the
      public felicity. If the empire had been afflicted by any recent
      calamity, by a plague, a famine, or an unsuccessful war; if the
      Tyber had, or if the Nile had not, risen beyond its banks; if the
      earth had shaken, or if the temperate order of the seasons had
      been interrupted, the superstitious Pagans were convinced that
      the crimes and the impiety of the Christians, who were spared by
      the excessive lenity of the government, had at length provoked
      the divine justice. It was not among a licentious and exasperated
      populace, that the forms of legal proceedings could be observed;
      it was not in an amphitheatre, stained with the blood of wild
      beasts and gladiators, that the voice of compassion could be
      heard. The impatient clamors of the multitude denounced the
      Christians as the enemies of gods and men, doomed them to the
      severest tortures, and venturing to accuse by name some of the
      most distinguished of the new sectaries, required with
      irresistible vehemence that they should be instantly apprehended
      and cast to the lions. 61 The provincial governors and
      magistrates who presided in the public spectacles were usually
      inclined to gratify the inclinations, and to appease the rage, of
      the people, by the sacrifice of a few obnoxious victims. But the
      wisdom of the emperors protected the church from the danger of
      these tumultuous clamors and irregular accusations, which they
      justly censured as repugnant both to the firmness and to the
      equity of their administration. The edicts of Hadrian and of
      Antoninus Pius expressly declared, that the voice of the
      multitude should never be admitted as legal evidence to convict
      or to punish those unfortunate persons who had embraced the
      enthusiasm of the Christians. 62


      61 (return) [ See Tertullian, (Apolog. c. 40.) The acts of the
      martyrdom of Polycarp exhibit a lively picture of these tumults,
      which were usually fomented by the malice of the Jews.]


      62 (return) [ These regulations are inserted in the above
      mentioned document of Hadrian and Pius. See the apology of
      Melito, (apud Euseb. l iv 26)]


      III. Punishment was not the inevitable consequence of conviction,
      and the Christians, whose guilt was the most clearly proved by
      the testimony of witnesses, or even by their voluntary
      confession, still retained in their own power the alternative of
      life or death. It was not so much the past offence, as the actual
      resistance, which excited the indignation of the magistrate. He
      was persuaded that he offered them an easy pardon, since, if they
      consented to cast a few grains of incense upon the altar, they
      were dismissed from the tribunal in safety and with applause. It
      was esteemed the duty of a humane judge to endeavor to reclaim,
      rather than to punish, those deluded enthusiasts. Varying his
      tone according to the age, the sex, or the situation of the
      prisoners, he frequently condescended to set before their eyes
      every circumstance which could render life more pleasing, or
      death more terrible; and to solicit, nay, to entreat, them, that
      they would show some compassion to themselves, to their families,
      and to their friends. 63 If threats and persuasions proved
      ineffectual, he had often recourse to violence; the scourge and
      the rack were called in to supply the deficiency of argument, and
      every art of cruelty was employed to subdue such inflexible, and,
      as it appeared to the Pagans, such criminal, obstinacy. The
      ancient apologists of Christianity have censured, with equal
      truth and severity, the irregular conduct of their persecutors
      who, contrary to every principle of judicial proceeding, admitted
      the use of torture, in order to obtain, not a confession, but a
      denial, of the crime which was the object of their inquiry. 64
      The monks of succeeding ages, who, in their peaceful solitudes,
      entertained themselves with diversifying the deaths and
      sufferings of the primitive martyrs, have frequently invented
      torments of a much more refined and ingenious nature. In
      particular, it has pleased them to suppose, that the zeal of the
      Roman magistrates, disdaining every consideration of moral virtue
      or public decency, endeavored to seduce those whom they were
      unable to vanquish, and that by their orders the most brutal
      violence was offered to those whom they found it impossible to
      seduce. It is related, that females, who were prepared to despise
      death, were sometimes condemned to a more severe trial, 6411 and
      called upon to determine whether they set a higher value on their
      religion or on their chastity. The youths to whose licentious
      embraces they were abandoned, received a solemn exhortation from
      the judge, to exert their most strenuous efforts to maintain the
      honor of Venus against the impious virgin who refused to burn
      incense on her altars. Their violence, however, was commonly
      disappointed, and the seasonable interposition of some miraculous
      power preserved the chaste spouses of Christ from the dishonor
      even of an involuntary defeat. We should not indeed neglect to
      remark, that the more ancient as well as authentic memorials of
      the church are seldom polluted with these extravagant and
      indecent fictions. 65


      63 (return) [ See the rescript of Trajan, and the conduct of
      Pliny. The most authentic acts of the martyrs abound in these
      exhortations. Note: Pliny’s test was the worship of the gods,
      offerings to the statue of the emperor, and blaspheming
      Christ—præterea maledicerent Christo.—M.]


      64 (return) [ In particular, see Tertullian, (Apolog. c. 2, 3,)
      and Lactantius, (Institut. Divin. v. 9.) Their reasonings are
      almost the same; but we may discover, that one of these
      apologists had been a lawyer, and the other a rhetorician.]


      6411 (return) [ The more ancient as well as authentic memorials
      of the church, relate many examples of the fact, (of these
      _severe trials_,) which there is nothing to contradict.
      Tertullian, among others, says, Nam proxime ad lenonem damnando
      Christianam, potius quam ad leonem, confessi estis labem
      pudicitiæ apud nos atrociorem omni pœna et omni morte reputari,
      Apol. cap. ult. Eusebius likewise says, “Other virgins, dragged
      to brothels, have lost their life rather than defile their
      virtue.” Euseb. Hist. Ecc. viii. 14.—G. The miraculous
      interpositions were the offspring of the coarse imaginations of
      the monks.—M.]


      65 (return) [ See two instances of this kind of torture in the
      Acta Sincere Martyrum, published by Ruinart, p. 160, 399. Jerome,
      in his Legend of Paul the Hermit, tells a strange story of a
      young man, who was chained naked on a bed of flowers, and
      assaulted by a beautiful and wanton courtesan. He quelled the
      rising temptation by biting off his tongue.]


      The total disregard of truth and probability in the
      representation of these primitive martyrdoms was occasioned by a
      very natural mistake. The ecclesiastical writers of the fourth or
      fifth centuries ascribed to the magistrates of Rome the same
      degree of implacable and unrelenting zeal which filled their own
      breasts against the heretics or the idolaters of their own times.


      It is not improbable that some of those persons who were raised
      to the dignities of the empire, might have imbibed the prejudices
      of the populace, and that the cruel disposition of others might
      occasionally be stimulated by motives of avarice or of personal
      resentment. 66 But it is certain, and we may appeal to the
      grateful confessions of the first Christians, that the greatest
      part of those magistrates who exercised in the provinces the
      authority of the emperor, or of the senate, and to whose hands
      alone the jurisdiction of life and death was intrusted, behaved
      like men of polished manners and liberal education, who respected
      the rules of justice, and who were conversant with the precepts
      of philosophy. They frequently declined the odious task of
      persecution, dismissed the charge with contempt, or suggested to
      the accused Christian some legal evasion, by which he might elude
      the severity of the laws. 67 Whenever they were invested with a
      discretionary power, 68 they used it much less for the
      oppression, than for the relief and benefit of the afflicted
      church. They were far from condemning all the Christians who were
      accused before their tribunal, and very far from punishing with
      death all those who were convicted of an obstinate adherence to
      the new superstition. Contenting themselves, for the most part,
      with the milder chastisements of imprisonment, exile, or slavery
      in the mines, 69 they left the unhappy victims of their justice
      some reason to hope, that a prosperous event, the accession, the
      marriage, or the triumph of an emperor, might speedily restore
      them, by a general pardon, to their former state. The martyrs,
      devoted to immediate execution by the Roman magistrates, appear
      to have been selected from the most opposite extremes. They were
      either bishops and presbyters, the persons the most distinguished
      among the Christians by their rank and influence, and whose
      example might strike terror into the whole sect; 70 or else they
      were the meanest and most abject among them, particularly those
      of the servile condition, whose lives were esteemed of little
      value, and whose sufferings were viewed by the ancients with too
      careless an indifference. 71 The learned Origen, who, from his
      experience as well as reading, was intimately acquainted with the
      history of the Christians, declares, in the most express terms,
      that the number of martyrs was very inconsiderable. 72 His
      authority would alone be sufficient to annihilate that formidable
      army of martyrs, whose relics, drawn for the most part from the
      catacombs of Rome, have replenished so many churches, 73 and
      whose marvellous achievements have been the subject of so many
      volumes of Holy Romance. 74 But the general assertion of Origen
      may be explained and confirmed by the particular testimony of his
      friend Dionysius, who, in the immense city of Alexandria, and
      under the rigorous persecution of Decius, reckons only ten men
      and seven women who suffered for the profession of the Christian
      name. 75


      66 (return) [ The conversion of his wife provoked Claudius
      Herminianus, governor of Cappadocia, to treat the Christians with
      uncommon severity. Tertullian ad Scapulam, c. 3.]


      67 (return) [ Tertullian, in his epistle to the governor of
      Africa, mentions several remarkable instances of lenity and
      forbearance, which had happened within his knowledge.]


      68 (return) [ Neque enim in universum aliquid quod quasi certam
      formam habeat, constitui potest; an expression of Trajan, which
      gave a very great latitude to the governors of provinces. * Note:
      Gibbon altogether forgets that Trajan fully approved of the
      course pursued by Pliny. That course was, to order all who
      persevered in their faith to be led to execution: perseverantes
      duci jussi.—M.]


      69 (return) [ In Metalla damnamur, in insulas relegamur.
      Tertullian, Apolog. c. 12. The mines of Numidia contained nine
      bishops, with a proportionable number of their clergy and people,
      to whom Cyprian addressed a pious epistle of praise and comfort.
      See Cyprian. Epistol. 76, 77.]


      70 (return) [ Though we cannot receive with entire confidence
      either the epistles, or the acts, of Ignatius, (they may be found
      in the 2d volume of the Apostolic Fathers,) yet we may quote that
      bishop of Antioch as one of these _exemplary_ martyrs. He was
      sent in chains to Rome as a public spectacle, and when he arrived
      at Troas, he received the pleasing intelligence, that the
      persecution of Antioch was already at an end. * Note: The acts of
      Ignatius are generally received as authentic, as are seven of his
      letters. Eusebius and St. Jerome mention them: there are two
      editions; in one, the letters are longer, and many passages
      appear to have been interpolated; the other edition is that which
      contains the real letters of St. Ignatius; such at least is the
      opinion of the wisest and most enlightened critics. (See Lardner.
      Cred. of Gospel Hist.) Less, uber dis Religion, v. i. p. 529.
      Usser. Diss. de Ign. Epist. Pearson, Vindic, Ignatianæ. It should
      be remarked, that it was under the reign of Trajan that the
      bishop Ignatius was carried from Antioch to Rome, to be exposed
      to the lions in the amphitheatre, the year of J. C. 107,
      according to some; of 116, according to others.—G.]


      71 (return) [ Among the martyrs of Lyons, (Euseb. l. v. c. 1,)
      the slave Blandina was distinguished by more exquisite tortures.
      Of the five martyrs so much celebrated in the acts of Felicitas
      and Perpetua, two were of a servile, and two others of a very
      mean, condition.]


      72 (return) [ Origen. advers. Celsum, l. iii. p. 116. His words
      deserve to be transcribed. * Note: The words that follow should
      be quoted. “God not permitting that all his class of men should
      be exterminated:” which appears to indicate that Origen thought
      the number put to death inconsiderable only when compared to the
      numbers who had survived. Besides this, he is speaking of the
      state of the religion under Caracalla, Elagabalus, Alexander
      Severus, and Philip, who had not persecuted the Christians. It
      was during the reign of the latter that Origen wrote his books
      against Celsus.—G.]


      73 (return) [ If we recollect that all the Plebeians of Rome were
      not Christians, and that all the Christians were not saints and
      martyrs, we may judge with how much safety religious honors can
      be ascribed to bones or urns, indiscriminately taken from the
      public burial-place. After ten centuries of a very free and open
      trade, some suspicions have arisen among the more learned
      Catholics. They now require as a proof of sanctity and martyrdom,
      the letters B.M., a vial full of red liquor supposed to be blood,
      or the figure of a palm-tree. But the two former signs are of
      little weight, and with regard to the last, it is observed by the
      critics, 1. That the figure, as it is called, of a palm, is
      perhaps a cypress, and perhaps only a stop, the flourish of a
      comma used in the monumental inscriptions. 2. That the palm was
      the symbol of victory among the Pagans. 3. That among the
      Christians it served as the emblem, not only of martyrdom, but in
      general of a joyful resurrection. See the epistle of P. Mabillon,
      on the worship of unknown saints, and Muratori sopra le Antichita
      Italiane, Dissertat. lviii.]


      74 (return) [ As a specimen of these legends, we may be satisfied
      with 10,000 Christian soldiers crucified in one day, either by
      Trajan or Hadrian on Mount Ararat. See Baronius ad Martyrologium
      Romanum; Tille mont, Mém. Ecclesiast. tom. ii. part ii. p. 438;
      and Geddes’s Miscellanies, vol. ii. p. 203. The abbreviation of
      Mil., which may signify either _soldiers_ or _thousands_, is said
      to have occasioned some extraordinary mistakes.]


      75 (return) [ Dionysius ap. Euseb l. vi. c. 41 One of the
      seventeen was likewise accused of robbery. * Note: Gibbon ought
      to have said, was falsely accused of robbery, for so it is in the
      Greek text. This Christian, named Nemesion, falsely accused of
      robbery before the centurion, was acquitted of a crime altogether
      foreign to his character, but he was led before the governor as
      guilty of being a Christian, and the governor inflicted upon him
      a double torture. (Euseb. loc. cit.) It must be added, that Saint
      Dionysius only makes particular mention of the principal martyrs,
      [this is very doubtful.—M.] and that he says, in general, that
      the fury of the Pagans against the Christians gave to Alexandria
      the appearance of a city taken by storm. [This refers to plunder
      and ill usage, not to actual slaughter.—M.] Finally it should be
      observed that Origen wrote before the persecution of the emperor
      Decius.—G.]


      During the same period of persecution, the zealous, the eloquent,
      the ambitious Cyprian governed the church, not only of Carthage,
      but even of Africa. He possessed every quality which could engage
      the reverence of the faithful, or provoke the suspicions and
      resentment of the Pagan magistrates. His character as well as his
      station seemed to mark out that holy prelate as the most
      distinguished object of envy and danger. 76 The experience,
      however, of the life of Cyprian, is sufficient to prove that our
      fancy has exaggerated the perilous situation of a Christian
      bishop; and the dangers to which he was exposed were less
      imminent than those which temporal ambition is always prepared to
      encounter in the pursuit of honors. Four Roman emperors, with
      their families, their favorites, and their adherents, perished by
      the sword in the space of ten years, during which the bishop of
      Carthage guided by his authority and eloquence the councils of
      the African church. It was only in the third year of his
      administration, that he had reason, during a few months, to
      apprehend the severe edicts of Decius, the vigilance of the
      magistrate and the clamors of the multitude, who loudly demanded,
      that Cyprian, the leader of the Christians, should be thrown to
      the lions. Prudence suggested the necessity of a temporary
      retreat, and the voice of prudence was obeyed. He withdrew
      himself into an obscure solitude, from whence he could maintain a
      constant correspondence with the clergy and people of Carthage;
      and, concealing himself till the tempest was past, he preserved
      his life, without relinquishing either his power or his
      reputation. His extreme caution did not, however, escape the
      censure of the more rigid Christians, who lamented, or the
      reproaches of his personal enemies, who insulted, a conduct which
      they considered as a pusillanimous and criminal desertion of the
      most sacred duty. 77 The propriety of reserving himself for the
      future exigencies of the church, the example of several holy
      bishops, 78 and the divine admonitions, which, as he declares
      himself, he frequently received in visions and ecstacies, were
      the reasons alleged in his justification. 79 But his best apology
      may be found in the cheerful resolution, with which, about eight
      years afterwards, he suffered death in the cause of religion. The
      authentic history of his martyrdom has been recorded with unusual
      candor and impartiality. A short abstract, therefore, of its most
      important circumstances, will convey the clearest information of
      the spirit, and of the forms, of the Roman persecutions. 80


      76 (return) [ The letters of Cyprian exhibit a very curious and
      original picture both of the _man_ and of the _times_. See
      likewise the two lives of Cyprian, composed with equal accuracy,
      though with very different views; the one by Le Clerc
      (Bibliothèque Universelle, tom. xii. p. 208-378,) the other by
      Tillemont, Mémoires Ecclésiastiques, tom. iv part i. p. 76-459.]


      77 (return) [ See the polite but severe epistle of the clergy of
      Rome to the bishop of Carthage. (Cyprian. Epist. 8, 9.) Pontius
      labors with the greatest care and diligence to justify his master
      against the general censure.]


      78 (return) [ In particular those of Dionysius of Alexandria, and
      Gregory Thaumaturgus, of Neo-Cæsarea. See Euseb. Hist.
      Ecclesiast. l. vi. c. 40; and Mémoires de Tillemont, tom. iv.
      part ii. p. 685.]


      79 (return) [ See Cyprian. Epist. 16, and his life by Pontius.]


      80 (return) [ We have an original life of Cyprian by the deacon
      Pontius, the companion of his exile, and the spectator of his
      death; and we likewise possess the ancient proconsular acts of
      his martyrdom. These two relations are consistent with each
      other, and with probability; and what is somewhat remarkable,
      they are both unsullied by any miraculous circumstances.]


      Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
      Constantine.—Part IV.


      When Valerian was consul for the third, and Gallienus for the
      fourth time, Paternus, proconsul of Africa, summoned Cyprian to
      appear in his private council-chamber. He there acquainted him
      with the Imperial mandate which he had just received, 81 that
      those who had abandoned the Roman religion should immediately
      return to the practice of the ceremonies of their ancestors.
      Cyprian replied without hesitation, that he was a Christian and a
      bishop, devoted to the worship of the true and only Deity, to
      whom he offered up his daily supplications for the safety and
      prosperity of the two emperors, his lawful sovereigns.


      With modest confidence he pleaded the privilege of a citizen, in
      refusing to give any answer to some invidious and indeed illegal
      questions which the proconsul had proposed. A sentence of
      banishment was pronounced as the penalty of Cyprian’s
      disobedience; and he was conducted without delay to Curubis, a
      free and maritime city of Zeugitania, in a pleasant situation, a
      fertile territory, and at the distance of about forty miles from
      Carthage. 82 The exiled bishop enjoyed the conveniences of life
      and the consciousness of virtue. His reputation was diffused over
      Africa and Italy; an account of his behavior was published for
      the edification of the Christian world; 83 and his solitude was
      frequently interrupted by the letters, the visits, and the
      congratulations of the faithful. On the arrival of a new
      proconsul in the province the fortune of Cyprian appeared for
      some time to wear a still more favorable aspect. He was recalled
      from banishment; and though not yet permitted to return to
      Carthage, his own gardens in the neighborhood of the capital were
      assigned for the place of his residence. 84


      81 (return) [ It should seem that these were circular orders,
      sent at the same time to all the governors. Dionysius (ap. Euseb.
      l. vii. c. 11) relates the history of his own banishment from
      Alexandria almost in the same manner. But as he escaped and
      survived the persecution, we must account him either more or less
      fortunate than Cyprian.]


      82 (return) [ See Plin. Hist. Natur. v. 3. Cellarius, Geograph.
      Antiq. part iii. p. 96. Shaw’s Travels, p. 90; and for the
      adjacent country, (which is terminated by Cape Bona, or the
      promontory of Mercury,) l’Afrique de Marmol. tom. ii. p. 494.
      There are the remains of an aqueduct near Curubis, or Curbis, at
      present altered into Gurbes; and Dr. Shaw read an inscription,
      which styles that city _Colonia Fulvia_. The deacon Pontius (in
      Vit. Cyprian. c. 12) calls it “Apricum et competentem locum,
      hospitium pro voluntate secretum, et quicquid apponi eis ante
      promissum est, qui regnum et justitiam Dei quærunt.”]


      83 (return) [ See Cyprian. Epistol. 77, edit. Fell.]


      84 (return) [ Upon his conversion, he had sold those gardens for
      the benefit of the poor. The indulgence of God (most probably the
      liberality of some Christian friend) restored them to Cyprian.
      See Pontius, c. 15.]


      At length, exactly one year 85 after Cyprian was first
      apprehended, Galerius Maximus, proconsul of Africa, received the
      Imperial warrant for the execution of the Christian teachers. The
      bishop of Carthage was sensible that he should be singled out for
      one of the first victims; and the frailty of nature tempted him
      to withdraw himself, by a secret flight, from the danger and the
      honor of martyrdom; 8511 but soon recovering that fortitude which
      his character required, he returned to his gardens, and patiently
      expected the ministers of death. Two officers of rank, who were
      intrusted with that commission, placed Cyprian between them in a
      chariot, and as the proconsul was not then at leisure, they
      conducted him, not to a prison, but to a private house in
      Carthage, which belonged to one of them. An elegant supper was
      provided for the entertainment of the bishop, and his Christian
      friends were permitted for the last time to enjoy his society,
      whilst the streets were filled with a multitude of the faithful,
      anxious and alarmed at the approaching fate of their spiritual
      father. 86 In the morning he appeared before the tribunal of the
      proconsul, who, after informing himself of the name and situation
      of Cyprian, commanded him to offer sacrifice, and pressed him to
      reflect on the consequences of his disobedience. The refusal of
      Cyprian was firm and decisive; and the magistrate, when he had
      taken the opinion of his council, pronounced with some reluctance
      the sentence of death. It was conceived in the following terms:
      “That Thascius Cyprianus should be immediately beheaded, as the
      enemy of the gods of Rome, and as the chief and ringleader of a
      criminal association, which he had seduced into an impious
      resistance against the laws of the most holy emperors, Valerian
      and Gallienus.” 87 The manner of his execution was the mildest
      and least painful that could be inflicted on a person convicted
      of any capital offence; nor was the use of torture admitted to
      obtain from the bishop of Carthage either the recantation of his
      principles or the discovery of his accomplices.


      85 (return) [ When Cyprian; a twelvemonth before, was sent into
      exile, he dreamt that he should be put to death the next day. The
      event made it necessary to explain that word, as signifying a
      year. Pontius, c. 12.]


      8511 (return) [ This was not, as it appears, the motive which
      induced St. Cyprian to conceal himself for a short time; he was
      threatened to be carried to Utica; he preferred remaining at
      Carthage, in order to suffer martyrdom in the midst of his flock,
      and in order that his death might conduce to the edification of
      those whom he had guided during life. Such, at least, is his own
      explanation of his conduct in one of his letters: Cum perlatum ad
      nos fuisset, fratres carissimi, frumentarios esse missos qui me
      Uticam per ducerent, consilioque carissimorum persuasum est, ut
      de hortis interim recederemus, justa interveniente causâ,
      consensi; eo quod congruat episcopum in eâ civitate, in quâ
      Ecclesiæ dominicæ præest, illie. Dominum confiteri et plebem
      universam præpositi præsentis confessione clarificari Ep. 83.—G]


      86 (return) [ Pontius (c. 15) acknowledges that Cyprian, with
      whom he supped, passed the night custodia delicata. The bishop
      exercised a last and very proper act of jurisdiction, by
      directing that the younger females, who watched in the streets,
      should be removed from the dangers and temptations of a nocturnal
      crowd. Act. Preconsularia, c. 2.]


      87 (return) [ See the original sentence in the Acts, c. 4; and in
      Pontius, c. 17 The latter expresses it in a more rhetorical
      manner.]


      As soon as the sentence was proclaimed, a general cry of “We will
      die with him,” arose at once among the listening multitude of
      Christians who waited before the palace gates. The generous
      effusions of their zeal and their affection were neither
      serviceable to Cyprian nor dangerous to themselves. He was led
      away under a guard of tribunes and centurions, without resistance
      and without insult, to the place of his execution, a spacious and
      level plain near the city, which was already filled with great
      numbers of spectators. His faithful presbyters and deacons were
      permitted to accompany their holy bishop. 8711 They assisted him
      in laying aside his upper garment, spread linen on the ground to
      catch the precious relics of his blood, and received his orders
      to bestow five-and-twenty pieces of gold on the executioner. The
      martyr then covered his face with his hands, and at one blow his
      head was separated from his body. His corpse remained during some
      hours exposed to the curiosity of the Gentiles: but in the night
      it was removed, and transported in a triumphal procession, and
      with a splendid illumination, to the burial-place of the
      Christians. The funeral of Cyprian was publicly celebrated
      without receiving any interruption from the Roman magistrates;
      and those among the faithful, who had performed the last offices
      to his person and his memory, were secure from the danger of
      inquiry or of punishment. It is remarkable, that of so great a
      multitude of bishops in the province of Africa, Cyprian was the
      first who was esteemed worthy to obtain the crown of martyrdom.
      88


      8711 (return) [ There is nothing in the life of St. Cyprian, by
      Pontius, nor in the ancient manuscripts, which can make us
      suppose that the presbyters and deacons in their clerical
      character, and known to be such, had the permission to attend
      their holy bishop. Setting aside all religious considerations, it
      is impossible not to be surprised at the kind of complaisance
      with which the historian here insists, in favor of the
      persecutors, on some mitigating circumstances allowed at the
      death of a man whose only crime was maintaining his own opinions
      with frankness and courage.—G.]


      88 (return) [ Pontius, c. 19. M. de Tillemont (Mémoires, tom. iv.
      part i. p. 450, note 50) is not pleased with so positive an
      exclusion of any former martyr of the episcopal rank. * Note: M.
      de. Tillemont, as an honest writer, explains the difficulties
      which he felt about the text of Pontius, and concludes by
      distinctly stating, that without doubt there is some mistake, and
      that Pontius must have meant only Africa Minor or Carthage; for
      St. Cyprian, in his 58th (69th) letter addressed to Pupianus,
      speaks expressly of many bishops his colleagues, qui proscripti
      sunt, vel apprehensi in carcere et catenis fuerunt; aut qui in
      exilium relegati, illustri itinere ed Dominum profecti sunt; aut
      qui quibusdam locis animadversi, cœlestes coronas de Domini
      clarificatione sumpserunt.—G.]


      It was in the choice of Cyprian, either to die a martyr, or to
      live an apostate; but on the choice depended the alternative of
      honor or infamy. Could we suppose that the bishop of Carthage had
      employed the profession of the Christian faith only as the
      instrument of his avarice or ambition, it was still incumbent on
      him to support the character he had assumed; 89 and if he
      possessed the smallest degree of manly fortitude, rather to
      expose himself to the most cruel tortures, than by a single act
      to exchange the reputation of a whole life, for the abhorrence of
      his Christian brethren, and the contempt of the Gentile world.
      But if the zeal of Cyprian was supported by the sincere
      conviction of the truth of those doctrines which he preached, the
      crown of martyrdom must have appeared to him as an object of
      desire rather than of terror. It is not easy to extract any
      distinct ideas from the vague though eloquent declamations of the
      Fathers, or to ascertain the degree of immortal glory and
      happiness which they confidently promised to those who were so
      fortunate as to shed their blood in the cause of religion. 90
      They inculcated with becoming diligence, that the fire of
      martyrdom supplied every defect and expiated every sin; that
      while the souls of ordinary Christians were obliged to pass
      through a slow and painful purification, the triumphant sufferers
      entered into the immediate fruition of eternal bliss, where, in
      the society of the patriarchs, the apostles, and the prophets,
      they reigned with Christ, and acted as his assessors in the
      universal judgment of mankind. The assurance of a lasting
      reputation upon earth, a motive so congenial to the vanity of
      human nature, often served to animate the courage of the martyrs.


      The honors which Rome or Athens bestowed on those citizens who
      had fallen in the cause of their country, were cold and unmeaning
      demonstrations of respect, when compared with the ardent
      gratitude and devotion which the primitive church expressed
      towards the victorious champions of the faith. The annual
      commemoration of their virtues and sufferings was observed as a
      sacred ceremony, and at length terminated in religious worship.
      Among the Christians who had publicly confessed their religious
      principles, those who (as it very frequently happened) had been
      dismissed from the tribunal or the prisons of the Pagan
      magistrates, obtained such honors as were justly due to their
      imperfect martyrdom and their generous resolution. The most pious
      females courted the permission of imprinting kisses on the
      fetters which they had worn, and on the wounds which they had
      received. Their persons were esteemed holy, their decisions were
      admitted with deference, and they too often abused, by their
      spiritual pride and licentious manners, the preëminence which
      their zeal and intrepidity had acquired. 91 Distinctions like
      these, whilst they display the exalted merit, betray the
      inconsiderable number of those who suffered, and of those who
      died, for the profession of Christianity.


      89 (return) [ Whatever opinion we may entertain of the character
      or principles of Thomas Becket, we must acknowledge that he
      suffered death with a constancy not unworthy of the primitive
      martyrs. See Lord Lyttleton’s History of Henry II. vol. ii. p.
      592, &c.]


      90 (return) [ See in particular the treatise of Cyprian de
      Lapsis, p. 87-98, edit. Fell. The learning of Dodwell (Dissertat.
      Cyprianic. xii. xiii.,) and the ingenuity of Middleton, (Free
      Inquiry, p. 162, &c.,) have left scarcely any thing to add
      concerning the merit, the honors, and the motives of the
      martyrs.]


      91 (return) [ Cyprian. Epistol. 5, 6, 7, 22, 24; and de Unitat.
      Ecclesiæ. The number of pretended martyrs has been very much
      multiplied, by the custom which was introduced of bestowing that
      honorable name on confessors. Note: M. Guizot denies that the
      letters of Cyprian, to which he refers, bear out the statement in
      the text. I cannot scruple to admit the accuracy of Gibbon’s
      quotation. To take only the fifth letter, we find this passage:
      Doleo enim quando audio quosdam improbe et insolenter discurrere,
      et ad ineptian vel ad discordias vacare, Christi membra et jam
      Christum confessa per concubitûs illicitos inquinari, nec a
      diaconis aut presbyteris regi posse, sed id agere ut per paucorum
      pravos et malos mores, multorum et bonorum confessorum gloria
      honesta maculetur. Gibbon’s misrepresentation lies in the
      ambiguous expression “too often.” Were the epistles arranged in a
      different manner in the edition consulted by M. Guizot?—M.]


      The sober discretion of the present age will more readily censure
      than admire, but can more easily admire than imitate, the fervor
      of the first Christians, who, according to the lively expressions
      of Sulpicius Severus, desired martyrdom with more eagerness than
      his own contemporaries solicited a bishopric. 92 The epistles
      which Ignatius composed as he was carried in chains through the
      cities of Asia, breathe sentiments the most repugnant to the
      ordinary feelings of human nature. He earnestly beseeches the
      Romans, that when he should be exposed in the amphitheatre, they
      would not, by their kind but unseasonable intercession, deprive
      him of the crown of glory; and he declares his resolution to
      provoke and irritate the wild beasts which might be employed as
      the instruments of his death. 93 Some stories are related of the
      courage of martyrs, who actually performed what Ignatius had
      intended; who exasperated the fury of the lions, pressed the
      executioner to hasten his office, cheerfully leaped into the
      fires which were kindled to consume them, and discovered a
      sensation of joy and pleasure in the midst of the most exquisite
      tortures. Several examples have been preserved of a zeal
      impatient of those restraints which the emperors had provided for
      the security of the church. The Christians sometimes supplied by
      their voluntary declaration the want of an accuser, rudely
      disturbed the public service of paganism, 94 and rushing in
      crowds round the tribunal of the magistrates, called upon them to
      pronounce and to inflict the sentence of the law. The behavior of
      the Christians was too remarkable to escape the notice of the
      ancient philosophers; but they seem to have considered it with
      much less admiration than astonishment. Incapable of conceiving
      the motives which sometimes transported the fortitude of
      believers beyond the bounds of prudence or reason, they treated
      such an eagerness to die as the strange result of obstinate
      despair, of stupid insensibility, or of superstitious frenzy. 95
      “Unhappy men!” exclaimed the proconsul Antoninus to the
      Christians of Asia; “unhappy men! if you are thus weary of your
      lives, is it so difficult for you to find ropes and precipices?”
      96 He was extremely cautious (as it is observed by a learned and
      picus historian) of punishing men who had found no accusers but
      themselves, the Imperial laws not having made any provision for
      so unexpected a case: condemning therefore a few as a warning to
      their brethren, he dismissed the multitude with indignation and
      contempt. 97 Notwithstanding this real or affected disdain, the
      intrepid constancy of the faithful was productive of more
      salutary effects on those minds which nature or grace had
      disposed for the easy reception of religious truth. On these
      melancholy occasions, there were many among the Gentiles who
      pitied, who admired, and who were converted. The generous
      enthusiasm was communicated from the sufferer to the spectators;
      and the blood of martyrs, according to a well-known observation,
      became the seed of the church.


      92 (return) [ Certatim gloriosa in certamina ruebatur; multique
      avidius tum martyria gloriosis mortibus quærebantur, quam nunc
      Episcopatus pravis ambitionibus appetuntur. Sulpicius Severus, l.
      ii. He might have omitted the word _nunc_.]


      93 (return) [ See Epist. ad Roman. c. 4, 5, ap. Patres Apostol.
      tom. ii. p. 27. It suited the purpose of Bishop Pearson (see
      Vindiciæ Ignatianæ, part ii. c. 9) to justify, by a profusion of
      examples and authorities, the sentiments of Ignatius.]


      94 (return) [ The story of Polyeuctes, on which Corneille has
      founded a very beautiful tragedy, is one of the most celebrated,
      though not perhaps the most authentic, instances of this
      excessive zeal. We should observe, that the 60th canon of the
      council of Illiberis refuses the title of martyrs to those who
      exposed themselves to death, by publicly destroying the idols.]


      95 (return) [ See Epictetus, l. iv. c. 7, (though there is some
      doubt whether he alludes to the Christians.) Marcus Antoninus de
      Rebus suis, l. xi. c. 3 Lucian in Peregrin.]


      96 (return) [ Tertullian ad Scapul. c. 5. The learned are divided
      between three persons of the same name, who were all proconsuls
      of Asia. I am inclined to ascribe this story to Antoninus Pius,
      who was afterwards emperor; and who may have governed Asia under
      the reign of Trajan.]


      97 (return) [ Mosheim, de Rebus Christ, ante Constantin. p. 235.]


      But although devotion had raised, and eloquence continued to
      inflame, this fever of the mind, it insensibly gave way to the
      more natural hopes and fears of the human heart, to the love of
      life, the apprehension of pain, and the horror of dissolution.
      The more prudent rulers of the church found themselves obliged to
      restrain the indiscreet ardor of their followers, and to distrust
      a constancy which too often abandoned them in the hour of trial.
      98 As the lives of the faithful became less mortified and
      austere, they were every day less ambitious of the honors of
      martyrdom; and the soldiers of Christ, instead of distinguishing
      themselves by voluntary deeds of heroism, frequently deserted
      their post, and fled in confusion before the enemy whom it was
      their duty to resist. There were three methods, however, of
      escaping the flames of persecution, which were not attended with
      an equal degree of guilt: first, indeed, was generally allowed to
      be innocent; the second was of a doubtful, or at least of a
      venial, nature; but the third implied a direct and criminal
      apostasy from the Christian faith.


      98 (return) [ See the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, ap. Euseb.
      Hist. Eccles. Liv. c. 15 * Note: The 15th chapter of the 10th
      book of the Eccles. History of Eusebius treats principally of the
      martyrdom of St. Polycarp, and mentions some other martyrs. A
      single example of weakness is related; it is that of a Phrygian
      named Quintus, who, appalled at the sight of the wild beasts and
      the tortures, renounced his faith. This example proves little
      against the mass of Christians, and this chapter of Eusebius
      furnished much stronger evidence of their courage than of their
      timidity.—G——This Quintus had, however, rashly and of his own
      accord appeared before the tribunal; and the church of Smyrna
      condemn “_his indiscreet ardor_,” coupled as it was with weakness
      in the hour of trial.—M.]


      I. A modern inquisitor would hear with surprise, that whenever an
      information was given to a Roman magistrate of any person within
      his jurisdiction who had embraced the sect of the Christians, the
      charge was communicated to the party accused, and that a
      convenient time was allowed him to settle his domestic concerns,
      and to prepare an answer to the crime which was imputed to him.
      99 If he entertained any doubt of his own constancy, such a delay
      afforded him the opportunity of preserving his life and honor by
      flight, of withdrawing himself into some obscure retirement or
      some distant province, and of patiently expecting the return of
      peace and security. A measure so consonant to reason was soon
      authorized by the advice and example of the most holy prelates;
      and seems to have been censured by few except by the Montanists,
      who deviated into heresy by their strict and obstinate adherence
      to the rigor of ancient discipline. 100


      II.The provincial governors, whose zeal was less prevalent than
      their avarice, had countenanced the practice of selling
      certificates, (or libels, as they were called,) which attested,
      that the persons therein mentioned had complied with the laws,
      and sacrificed to the Roman deities. By producing these false
      declarations, the opulent and timid Christians were enabled to
      silence the malice of an informer, and to reconcile in some
      measure their safety with their religion.101 A slight penance
      atoned for this profane dissimulation. 1011


      III. In every persecution there were great numbers of unworthy
      Christians who publicly disowned or renounced the faith which
      they had professed; and who confirmed the sincerity of their
      abjuration, by the legal acts of burning incense or of offering
      sacrifices. Some of these apostates had yielded on the first
      menace or exhortation of the magistrate; whilst the patience of
      others had been subdued by the length and repetition of tortures.
      The affrighted countenances of some betrayed their inward
      remorse, while others advanced with confidence and alacrity to
      the altars of the gods. 102 But the disguise which fear had
      imposed, subsisted no longer than the present danger. As soon as
      the severity of the persecution was abated, the doors of the
      churches were assailed by the returning multitude of penitents
      who detested their idolatrous submission, and who solicited with
      equal ardor, but with various success, their readmission into the
      society of Christians. 103 1031


      99 (return) [ In the second apology of Justin, there is a
      particular and very curious instance of this legal delay. The
      same indulgence was granted to accused Christians, in the
      persecution of Decius: and Cyprian (de Lapsis) expressly mentions
      the “Dies negantibus præstitutus.” * Note: The examples drawn by
      the historian from Justin Martyr and Cyprian relate altogether to
      particular cases, and prove nothing as to the general practice
      adopted towards the accused; it is evident, on the contrary, from
      the same apology of St. Justin, that they hardly ever obtained
      delay. “A man named Lucius, himself a Christian, present at an
      unjust sentence passed against a Christian by the judge Urbicus,
      asked him why he thus punished a man who was neither adulterer
      nor robber, nor guilty of any other crime but that of avowing
      himself a Christian.” Urbicus answered only in these words: “Thou
      also hast the appearance of being a Christian.” “Yes, without
      doubt,” replied Lucius. The judge ordered that he should be put
      to death on the instant. A third, who came up, was condemned to
      be beaten with rods. Here, then, are three examples where no
      delay was granted.——[Surely these acts of a single passionate and
      irritated judge prove the general practice as little as those
      quoted by Gibbon.—M.] There exist a multitude of others, such as
      those of Ptolemy, Marcellus, &c. Justin expressly charges the
      judges with ordering the accused to be executed without hearing
      the cause. The words of St. Cyprian are as particular, and simply
      say, that he had appointed a day by which the Christians must
      have renounced their faith; those who had not done it by that
      time were condemned.—G. This confirms the statement in the
      text.—M.]


      100 (return) [ Tertullian considers flight from persecution as an
      imperfect, but very criminal, apostasy, as an impious attempt to
      elude the will of God, &c., &c. He has written a treatise on this
      subject, (see p. 536—544, edit. Rigalt.,) which is filled with
      the wildest fanaticism and the most incoherent declamation. It
      is, however, somewhat remarkable, that Tertullian did not suffer
      martyrdom himself.]


      101 (return) [ The _libellatici_, who are chiefly known by the
      writings of Cyprian, are described with the utmost precision, in
      the copious commentary of Mosheim, p. 483—489.]


      1011 (return) [ The penance was not so slight, for it was exactly
      the same with that of apostates who had sacrificed to idols; it
      lasted several years. See Fleun Hist. Ecc. v. ii. p. 171.—G.]


      102 (return) [ Plin. Epist. x. 97. Dionysius Alexandrin. ap.
      Euseb. l. vi. c. 41. Ad prima statim verba minantis inimici
      maximus fratrum numerus fidem suam prodidit: nec prostratus est
      persecutionis impetu, sed voluntario lapsu seipsum prostravit.
      Cyprian. Opera, p. 89. Among these deserters were many priests,
      and even bishops.]


      103 (return) [ It was on this occasion that Cyprian wrote his
      treatise De Lapsis, and many of his epistles. The controversy
      concerning the treatment of penitent apostates, does not occur
      among the Christians of the preceding century. Shall we ascribe
      this to the superiority of their faith and courage, or to our
      less intimate knowledge of their history!]


      1031 (return) [ Pliny says, that the greater part of the
      Christians persisted in avowing themselves to be so; the reason
      for his consulting Trajan was the periclitantium numerus.
      Eusebius (l. vi. c. 41) does not permit us to doubt that the
      number of those who renounced their faith was infinitely below
      the number of those who boldly confessed it. The prefect, he says
      and his assessors present at the council, were alarmed at seeing
      the crowd of Christians; the judges themselves trembled. Lastly,
      St. Cyprian informs us, that the greater part of those who had
      appeared weak brethren in the persecution of Decius, signalized
      their courage in that of Gallius. Steterunt fortes, et ipso
      dolore pœnitentiæ facti ad prælium fortiores Epist. lx. p.
      142.—G.]


      IV. Notwithstanding the general rules established for the
      conviction and punishment of the Christians, the fate of those
      sectaries, in an extensive and arbitrary government, must still
      in a great measure, have depended on their own behavior, the
      circumstances of the times, and the temper of their supreme as
      well as subordinate rulers. Zeal might sometimes provoke, and
      prudence might sometimes avert or assuage, the superstitious fury
      of the Pagans. A variety of motives might dispose the provincial
      governors either to enforce or to relax the execution of the
      laws; and of these motives the most forcible was their regard not
      only for the public edicts, but for the secret intentions of the
      emperor, a glance from whose eye was sufficient to kindle or to
      extinguish the flames of persecution. As often as any occasional
      severities were exercised in the different parts of the empire,
      the primitive Christians lamented and perhaps magnified their own
      sufferings; but the celebrated number of _ten_ persecutions has
      been determined by the ecclesiastical writers of the fifth
      century, who possessed a more distinct view of the prosperous or
      adverse fortunes of the church, from the age of Nero to that of
      Diocletian. The ingenious parallels of the _ten_ plagues of
      Egypt, and of the _ten_ horns of the Apocalypse, first suggested
      this calculation to their minds; and in their application of the
      faith of prophecy to the truth of history, they were careful to
      select those reigns which were indeed the most hostile to the
      Christian cause. 104 But these transient persecutions served only
      to revive the zeal and to restore the discipline of the faithful;
      and the moments of extraordinary rigor were compensated by much
      longer intervals of peace and security. The indifference of some
      princes, and the indulgence of others, permitted the Christians
      to enjoy, though not perhaps a legal, yet an actual and public,
      toleration of their religion.


      104 (return) [ See Mosheim, p. 97. Sulpicius Severus was the
      first author of this computation; though he seemed desirous of
      reserving the tenth and greatest persecution for the coming of
      the Antichrist.]


      Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
      Constantine.—Part V.


      The apology of Tertullian contains two very ancient, very
      singular, but at the same time very suspicious, instances of
      Imperial clemency; the edicts published by Tiberius, and by
      Marcus Antoninus, and designed not only to protect the innocence
      of the Christians, but even to proclaim those stupendous miracles
      which had attested the truth of their doctrine. The first of
      these examples is attended with some difficulties which might
      perplex a sceptical mind. 105 We are required to believe, _that_
      Pontius Pilate informed the emperor of the unjust sentence of
      death which he had pronounced against an innocent, and, as it
      appeared, a divine, person; and that, without acquiring the
      merit, he exposed himself to the danger of martyrdom; _that_
      Tiberius, who avowed his contempt for all religion, immediately
      conceived the design of placing the Jewish Messiah among the gods
      of Rome; _that_ his servile senate ventured to disobey the
      commands of their master; _that_ Tiberius, instead of resenting
      their refusal, contented himself with protecting the Christians
      from the severity of the laws, many years before such laws were
      enacted, or before the church had assumed any distinct name or
      existence; and lastly, _that_ the memory of this extraordinary
      transaction was preserved in the most public and authentic
      records, which escaped the knowledge of the historians of Greece
      and Rome, and were only visible to the eyes of an African
      Christian, who composed his apology one hundred and sixty years
      after the death of Tiberius. The edict of Marcus Antoninus is
      supposed to have been the effect of his devotion and gratitude
      for the miraculous deliverance which he had obtained in the
      Marcomannic war. The distress of the legions, the seasonable
      tempest of rain and hail, of thunder and of lightning, and the
      dismay and defeat of the barbarians, have been celebrated by the
      eloquence of several Pagan writers. If there were any Christians
      in that army, it was natural that they should ascribe some merit
      to the fervent prayers, which, in the moment of danger, they had
      offered up for their own and the public safety. But we are still
      assured by monuments of brass and marble, by the Imperial medals,
      and by the Antonine column, that neither the prince nor the
      people entertained any sense of this signal obligation, since
      they unanimously attribute their deliverance to the providence of
      Jupiter, and to the interposition of Mercury. 106 During the
      whole course of his reign, Marcus despised the Christians as a
      philosopher, and punished them as a sovereign. 1061


      105 (return) [ The testimony given by Pontius Pilate is first
      mentioned by Justin. The successive improvements which the story
      acquired (as if has passed through the hands of Tertullian,
      Eusebius, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Orosius, Gregory of Tours, and
      the authors of the several editions of the acts of Pilate) are
      very fairly stated by Dom Calmet Dissertat. sur l’Ecriture, tom.
      iii. p. 651, &c.]


      106 (return) [ On this miracle, as it is commonly called, of the
      thundering legion, see the admirable criticism of Mr. Moyle, in
      his Works, vol. ii. p. 81—390.]


      1061 (return) [ Gibbon, with this phrase, and that below, which
      admits the injustice of Marcus, has dexterously glossed over one
      of the most remarkable facts in the early Christian history, that
      the reign of the wisest and most humane of the heathen emperors
      was the most fatal to the Christians. Most writers have ascribed
      the persecutions under Marcus to the latent bigotry of his
      character; Mosheim, to the influence of the philosophic party;
      but the fact is admitted by all. A late writer (Mr. Waddington,
      Hist. of the Church, p. 47) has not scrupled to assert, that
      “this prince polluted every year of a long reign with innocent
      blood;” but the causes as well as the date of the persecutions
      authorized or permitted by Marcus are equally uncertain. Of the
      Asiatic edict recorded by Melito. the date is unknown, nor is it
      quite clear that it was an Imperial edict. If it was the act
      under which Polycarp suffered, his martyrdom is placed by Ruinart
      in the sixth, by Mosheim in the ninth, year of the reign of
      Marcus. The martyrs of Vienne and Lyons are assigned by Dodwell
      to the seventh, by most writers to the seventeenth. In fact, the
      commencement of the persecutions of the Christians appears to
      synchronize exactly with the period of the breaking out of the
      Marcomannic war, which seems to have alarmed the whole empire,
      and the emperor himself, into a paroxysm of returning piety to
      their gods, of which the Christians were the victims. See Jul,
      Capit. Script. Hist August. p. 181, edit. 1661. It is remarkable
      that Tertullian (Apologet. c. v.) distinctly asserts that Verus
      (M. Aurelius) issued no edicts against the Christians, and almost
      positively exempts him from the charge of persecution.—M. This
      remarkable synchronism, which explains the persecutions under M
      Aurelius, is shown at length in Milman’s History of Christianity,
      book ii. v.—M. 1845.]


      By a singular fatality, the hardships which they had endured
      under the government of a virtuous prince, immediately ceased on
      the accession of a tyrant; and as none except themselves had
      experienced the injustice of Marcus, so they alone were protected
      by the lenity of Commodus. The celebrated Marcia, the most
      favored of his concubines, and who at length contrived the murder
      of her Imperial lover, entertained a singular affection for the
      oppressed church; and though it was impossible that she could
      reconcile the practice of vice with the precepts of the gospel,
      she might hope to atone for the frailties of her sex and
      profession by declaring herself the patroness of the Christians.
      107 Under the gracious protection of Marcia, they passed in
      safety the thirteen years of a cruel tyranny; and when the empire
      was established in the house of Severus, they formed a domestic
      but more honorable connection with the new court. The emperor was
      persuaded, that in a dangerous sickness, he had derived some
      benefit, either spiritual or physical, from the holy oil, with
      which one of his slaves had anointed him. He always treated with
      peculiar distinction several persons of both sexes who had
      embraced the new religion. The nurse as well as the preceptor of
      Caracalla were Christians; 1071 and if that young prince ever
      betrayed a sentiment of humanity, it was occasioned by an
      incident, which, however trifling, bore some relation to the
      cause of Christianity. 108 Under the reign of Severus, the fury
      of the populace was checked; the rigor of ancient laws was for
      some time suspended; and the provincial governors were satisfied
      with receiving an annual present from the churches within their
      jurisdiction, as the price, or as the reward, of their
      moderation. 109 The controversy concerning the precise time of
      the celebration of Easter, armed the bishops of Asia and Italy
      against each other, and was considered as the most important
      business of this period of leisure and tranquillity. 110 Nor was
      the peace of the church interrupted, till the increasing numbers
      of proselytes seem at length to have attracted the attention, and
      to have alienated the mind of Severus. With the design of
      restraining the progress of Christianity, he published an edict,
      which, though it was designed to affect only the new converts,
      could not be carried into strict execution, without exposing to
      danger and punishment the most zealous of their teachers and
      missionaries. In this mitigated persecution we may still discover
      the indulgent spirit of Rome and of Polytheism, which so readily
      admitted every excuse in favor of those who practised the
      religious ceremonies of their fathers. 111


      107 (return) [ Dion Cassius, or rather his abbreviator Xiphilin,
      l. lxxii. p. 1206. Mr. Moyle (p. 266) has explained the condition
      of the church under the reign of Commodus.]


      1071 (return) [ The Jews and Christians contest the honor of
      having furnished a nurse is the fratricide son of Severus
      Caracalla. Hist. of Jews, iii. 158.—M.]


      108 (return) [ Compare the life of Caracalla in the Augustan
      History, with the epistle of Tertullian to Scapula. Dr. Jortin
      (Remarks on Ecclesiastical History, vol. ii. p. 5, &c.) considers
      the cure of Severus by the means of holy oil, with a strong
      desire to convert it into a miracle.]


      109 (return) [ Tertullian de Fuga, c. 13. The present was made
      during the feast of the Saturnalia; and it is a matter of serious
      concern to Tertullian, that the faithful should be confounded
      with the most infamous professions which purchased the connivance
      of the government.]


      110 (return) [ Euseb. l. v. c. 23, 24. Mosheim, p. 435—447.]


      111 (return) [ Judæos fieri sub gravi pœna vetuit. Idem etiam de
      Christianis sanxit. Hist. August. p. 70.]


      But the laws which Severus had enacted soon expired with the
      authority of that emperor; and the Christians, after this
      accidental tempest, enjoyed a calm of thirty-eight years. 112
      Till this period they had usually held their assemblies in
      private houses and sequestered places. They were now permitted to
      erect and consecrate convenient edifices for the purpose of
      religious worship; 113 to purchase lands, even at Rome itself,
      for the use of the community; and to conduct the elections of
      their ecclesiastical ministers in so public, but at the same time
      in so exemplary a manner, as to deserve the respectful attention
      of the Gentiles. 114 This long repose of the church was
      accompanied with dignity. The reigns of those princes who derived
      their extraction from the Asiatic provinces, proved the most
      favorable to the Christians; the eminent persons of the sect,
      instead of being reduced to implore the protection of a slave or
      concubine, were admitted into the palace in the honorable
      characters of priests and philosophers; and their mysterious
      doctrines, which were already diffused among the people,
      insensibly attracted the curiosity of their sovereign. When the
      empress Mammæa passed through Antioch, she expressed a desire of
      conversing with the celebrated Origen, the fame of whose piety
      and learning was spread over the East. Origen obeyed so
      flattering an invitation, and though he could not expect to
      succeed in the conversion of an artful and ambitious woman, she
      listened with pleasure to his eloquent exhortations, and
      honorably dismissed him to his retirement in Palestine. 115 The
      sentiments of Mammæa were adopted by her son Alexander, and the
      philosophic devotion of that emperor was marked by a singular but
      injudicious regard for the Christian religion. In his domestic
      chapel he placed the statues of Abraham, of Orpheus, of
      Apollonius, and of Christ, as an honor justly due to those
      respectable sages who had instructed mankind in the various modes
      of addressing their homage to the supreme and universal Deity.
      116 A purer faith, as well as worship, was openly professed and
      practised among his household. Bishops, perhaps for the first
      time, were seen at court; and, after the death of Alexander, when
      the inhuman Maximin discharged his fury on the favorites and
      servants of his unfortunate benefactor, a great number of
      Christians of every rank and of both sexes, were involved in the
      promiscuous massacre, which, on their account, has improperly
      received the name of Persecution. 117 1171


      112 (return) [ Sulpicius Severus, l. ii. p. 384. This computation
      (allowing for a single exception) is confirmed by the history of
      Eusebius, and by the writings of Cyprian.]


      113 (return) [ The antiquity of Christian churches is discussed
      by Tillemont, (Mémoires Ecclésiastiques, tom. iii. part ii. p.
      68-72,) and by Mr. Moyle, (vol. i. p. 378-398.) The former refers
      the first construction of them to the peace of Alexander Severus;
      the latter, to the peace of Gallienus.]


      114 (return) [ See the Augustan History, p. 130. The emperor
      Alexander adopted their method of publicly proposing the names of
      those persons who were candidates for ordination. It is true that
      the honor of this practice is likewise attributed to the Jews.]


      115 (return) [ Euseb. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. vi. c. 21. Hieronym.
      de Script. Eccles. c. 54. Mammæa was styled a holy and pious
      woman, both by the Christians and the Pagans. From the former,
      therefore, it was impossible that she should deserve that
      honorable epithet.]


      116 (return) [ See the Augustan History, p. 123. Mosheim (p. 465)
      seems to refine too much on the domestic religion of Alexander.
      His design of building a public temple to Christ, (Hist. August.
      p. 129,) and the objection which was suggested either to him, or
      in similar circumstances to Hadrian, appear to have no other
      foundation than an improbable report, invented by the Christians,
      and credulously adopted by an historian of the age of
      Constantine.]


      117 (return) [ Euseb. l. vi. c. 28. It may be presumed that the
      success of the Christians had exasperated the increasing bigotry
      of the Pagans. Dion Cassius, who composed his history under the
      former reign, had most probably intended for the use of his
      master those counsels of persecution, which he ascribes to a
      better age, and to and to the favorite of Augustus. Concerning
      this oration of Mæcenas, or rather of Dion, I may refer to my own
      unbiased opinion, (vol. i. c. 1, note 25,) and to the Abbé de la
      Bleterie (Mémoires de l’Académie, tom. xxiv. p. 303 tom xxv. p.
      432.) * Note: If this be the case, Dion Cassius must have known
      the Christians they must have been the subject of his particular
      attention, since the author supposes that he wished his master to
      profit by these “counsels of persecution.” How are we to
      reconcile this necessary consequence with what Gibbon has said of
      the ignorance of Dion Cassius even of the name of the Christians?
      (c. xvi. n. 24.) (Gibbon speaks of Dion’s _silence_, not of his
      _ignorance_.—M) The supposition in this note is supported by no
      proof; it is probable that Dion Cassius has often designated the
      Christians by the name of Jews. See Dion Cassius, l. lxvii. c 14,
      lxviii. l—G. On this point I should adopt the view of Gibbon
      rather than that of M Guizot.—M]


      1171 (return) [ It is with good reason that this massacre has
      been called a persecution, for it lasted during the whole reign
      of Maximin, as may be seen in Eusebius. (l. vi. c. 28.) Rufinus
      expressly confirms it: Tribus annis a Maximino persecutione
      commota, in quibus finem et persecutionis fecit et vitas Hist. l.
      vi. c. 19.—G.]


      Notwithstanding the cruel disposition of Maximin, the effects of
      his resentment against the Christians were of a very local and
      temporary nature, and the pious Origen, who had been proscribed
      as a devoted victim, was still reserved to convey the truths of
      the gospel to the ear of monarchs. 118 He addressed several
      edifying letters to the emperor Philip, to his wife, and to his
      mother; and as soon as that prince, who was born in the
      neighborhood of Palestine, had usurped the Imperial sceptre, the
      Christians acquired a friend and a protector. The public and even
      partial favor of Philip towards the sectaries of the new
      religion, and his constant reverence for the ministers of the
      church, gave some color to the suspicion, which prevailed in his
      own times, that the emperor himself was become a convert to the
      faith; 119 and afforded some grounds for a fable which was
      afterwards invented, that he had been purified by confession and
      penance from the guilt contracted by the murder of his innocent
      predecessor. 120 The fall of Philip introduced, with the change
      of masters, a new system of government, so oppressive to the
      Christians, that their former condition, ever since the time of
      Domitian, was represented as a state of perfect freedom and
      security, if compared with the rigorous treatment which they
      experienced under the short reign of Decius. 121 The virtues of
      that prince will scarcely allow us to suspect that he was
      actuated by a mean resentment against the favorites of his
      predecessor; and it is more reasonable to believe, that in the
      prosecution of his general design to restore the purity of Roman
      manners, he was desirous of delivering the empire from what he
      condemned as a recent and criminal superstition. The bishops of
      the most considerable cities were removed by exile or death: the
      vigilance of the magistrates prevented the clergy of Rome during
      sixteen months from proceeding to a new election; and it was the
      opinion of the Christians, that the emperor would more patiently
      endure a competitor for the purple, than a bishop in the capital.
      122 Were it possible to suppose that the penetration of Decius
      had discovered pride under the disguise of humility, or that he
      could foresee the temporal dominion which might insensibly arise
      from the claims of spiritual authority, we might be less
      surprised, that he should consider the successors of St. Peter,
      as the most formidable rivals to those of Augustus.


      118 (return) [ Orosius, l. vii. c. 19, mentions Origen as the
      object of Maximin’s resentment; and Firmilianus, a Cappadocian
      bishop of that age, gives a just and confined idea of this
      persecution, (apud Cyprian Epist. 75.)]


      119 (return) [ The mention of those princes who were publicly
      supposed to be Christians, as we find it in an epistle of
      Dionysius of Alexandria, (ap. Euseb. l. vii. c. 10,) evidently
      alludes to Philip and his family, and forms a contemporary
      evidence, that such a report had prevailed; but the Egyptian
      bishop, who lived at an humble distance from the court of Rome,
      expresses himself with a becoming diffidence concerning the truth
      of the fact. The epistles of Origen (which were extant in the
      time of Eusebius, see l. vi. c. 36) would most probably decide
      this curious rather than important question.]


      120 (return) [ Euseb. l. vi. c. 34. The story, as is usual, has
      been embellished by succeeding writers, and is confuted, with
      much superfluous learning, by Frederick Spanheim, (Opera Varia,
      tom. ii. p. 400, &c.)]


      121 (return) [ Lactantius, de Mortibus Persecutorum, c. 3, 4.
      After celebrating the felicity and increase of the church, under
      a long succession of good princes, he adds, “Extitit post annos
      plurimos, execrabile animal, Decius, qui vexaret Ecclesiam.”]


      122 (return) [ Euseb. l. vi. c. 39. Cyprian. Epistol. 55. The see
      of Rome remained vacant from the martyrdom of Fabianus, the 20th
      of January, A. D. 259, till the election of Cornelius, the 4th of
      June, A. D. 251 Decius had probably left Rome, since he was
      killed before the end of that year.]


      The administration of Valerian was distinguished by a levity and
      inconstancy ill suited to the gravity of the _Roman Censor_. In
      the first part of his reign, he surpassed in clemency those
      princes who had been suspected of an attachment to the Christian
      faith. In the last three years and a half, listening to the
      insinuations of a minister addicted to the superstitions of
      Egypt, he adopted the maxims, and imitated the severity, of his
      predecessor Decius. 123 The accession of Gallienus, which
      increased the calamities of the empire, restored peace to the
      church; and the Christians obtained the free exercise of their
      religion by an edict addressed to the bishops, and conceived in
      such terms as seemed to acknowledge their office and public
      character. 124 The ancient laws, without being formally repealed,
      were suffered to sink into oblivion; and (excepting only some
      hostile intentions which are attributed to the emperor Aurelian
      125 the disciples of Christ passed above forty years in a state
      of prosperity, far more dangerous to their virtue than the
      severest trials of persecution.


      123 (return) [ Euseb. l. vii. c. 10. Mosheim (p. 548) has very
      clearly shown that the præfect Macrianus, and the Egyptian
      _Magus_, are one and the same person.]


      124 (return) [ Eusebius (l. vii. c. 13) gives us a Greek version
      of this Latin edict, which seems to have been very concise. By
      another edict, he directed that the _Cæmeteria_ should be
      restored to the Christians.]


      125 (return) [ Euseb. l. vii. c. 30. Lactantius de M. P. c. 6.
      Hieronym. in Chron. p. 177. Orosius, l. vii. c. 23. Their
      language is in general so ambiguous and incorrect, that we are at
      a loss to determine how far Aurelian had carried his intentions
      before he was assassinated. Most of the moderns (except Dodwell,
      Dissertat. Cyprian. vi. 64) have seized the occasion of gaining a
      few extraordinary martyrs. * Note: Dr. Lardner has detailed, with
      his usual impartiality, all that has come down to us relating to
      the persecution of Aurelian, and concludes by saying, “Upon more
      carefully examining the words of Eusebius, and observing the
      accounts of other authors, learned men have generally, and, as I
      think, very judiciously, determined, that Aurelian not only
      intended, but did actually persecute: but his persecution was
      short, he having died soon after the publication of his edicts.”
      Heathen Test. c. xxxvi.—Basmage positively pronounces the same
      opinion: Non intentatum modo, sed executum quoque brevissimo
      tempore mandatum, nobis infixum est in aniasis. Basn. Ann. 275,
      No. 2 and compare Pagi Ann. 272, Nos. 4, 12, 27—G.]


      The story of Paul of Samosata, who filled the metropolitan see of
      Antioch, while the East was in the hands of Odenathus and
      Zenobia, may serve to illustrate the condition and character of
      the times. The wealth of that prelate was a sufficient evidence
      of his guilt, since it was neither derived from the inheritance
      of his fathers, nor acquired by the arts of honest industry. But
      Paul considered the service of the church as a very lucrative
      profession. 126 His ecclesiastical jurisdiction was venal and
      rapacious; he extorted frequent contributions from the most
      opulent of the faithful, and converted to his own use a
      considerable part of the public revenue. By his pride and luxury,
      the Christian religion was rendered odious in the eyes of the
      Gentiles. His council chamber and his throne, the splendor with
      which he appeared in public, the suppliant crowd who solicited
      his attention, the multitude of letters and petitions to which he
      dictated his answers, and the perpetual hurry of business in
      which he was involved, were circumstances much better suited to
      the state of a civil magistrate, 127 than to the humility of a
      primitive bishop. When he harangued his people from the pulpit,
      Paul affected the figurative style and the theatrical gestures of
      an Asiatic sophist, while the cathedral resounded with the
      loudest and most extravagant acclamations in the praise of his
      divine eloquence. Against those who resisted his power, or
      refused to flatter his vanity, the prelate of Antioch was
      arrogant, rigid, and inexorable; but he relaxed the discipline,
      and lavished the treasures of the church on his dependent clergy,
      who were permitted to imitate their master in the gratification
      of every sensual appetite. For Paul indulged himself very freely
      in the pleasures of the table, and he had received into the
      episcopal palace two young and beautiful women as the constant
      companions of his leisure moments. 128


      126 (return) [ Paul was better pleased with the title of
      _Ducenarius_, than with that of bishop. The _Ducenarius_ was an
      Imperial procurator, so called from his salary of two hundred
      _Sestertia_, or 1600_l_. a year. (See Salmatius ad Hist. August.
      p. 124.) Some critics suppose that the bishop of Antioch had
      actually obtained such an office from Zenobia, while others
      consider it only as a figurative expression of his pomp and
      insolence.]


      127 (return) [ Simony was not unknown in those times; and the
      clergy some times bought what they intended to sell. It appears
      that the bishopric of Carthage was purchased by a wealthy matron,
      named Lucilla, for her servant Majorinus. The price was 400
      _Folles_. (Monument. Antiq. ad calcem Optati, p. 263.) Every
      _Follis_ contained 125 pieces of silver, and the whole sum may be
      computed at about 2400_l_.]


      128 (return) [ If we are desirous of extenuating the vices of
      Paul, we must suspect the assembled bishops of the East of
      publishing the most malicious calumnies in circular epistles
      addressed to all the churches of the empire, (ap. Euseb. l. vii.
      c. 30.)]


      Notwithstanding these scandalous vices, if Paul of Samosata had
      preserved the purity of the orthodox faith, his reign over the
      capital of Syria would have ended only with his life; and had a
      seasonable persecution intervened, an effort of courage might
      perhaps have placed him in the rank of saints and martyrs. 1281


      Some nice and subtle errors, which he imprudently adopted and
      obstinately maintained, concerning the doctrine of the Trinity,
      excited the zeal and indignation of the Eastern churches. 129


      From Egypt to the Euxine Sea, the bishops were in arms and in
      motion. Several councils were held, confutations were published,
      excommunications were pronounced, ambiguous explanations were by
      turns accepted and refused, treaties were concluded and violated,
      and at length Paul of Samosata was degraded from his episcopal
      character, by the sentence of seventy or eighty bishops, who
      assembled for that purpose at Antioch, and who, without
      consulting the rights of the clergy or people, appointed a
      successor by their own authority. The manifest irregularity of
      this proceeding increased the numbers of the discontented
      faction; and as Paul, who was no stranger to the arts of courts,
      had insinuated himself into the favor of Zenobia, he maintained
      above four years the possession of the episcopal house and
      office. 1291 The victory of Aurelian changed the face of the
      East, and the two contending parties, who applied to each other
      the epithets of schism and heresy, were either commanded or
      permitted to plead their cause before the tribunal of the
      conqueror. This public and very singular trial affords a
      convincing proof that the existence, the property, the
      privileges, and the internal policy of the Christians, were
      acknowledged, if not by the laws, at least by the magistrates, of
      the empire. As a Pagan and as a soldier, it could scarcely be
      expected that Aurelian should enter into the discussion, whether
      the sentiments of Paul or those of his adversaries were most
      agreeable to the true standard of the orthodox faith. His
      determination, however, was founded on the general principles of
      equity and reason. He considered the bishops of Italy as the most
      impartial and respectable judges among the Christians, and as
      soon as he was informed that they had unanimously approved the
      sentence of the council, he acquiesced in their opinion, and
      immediately gave orders that Paul should be compelled to
      relinquish the temporal possessions belonging to an office, of
      which, in the judgment of his brethren, he had been regularly
      deprived. But while we applaud the justice, we should not
      overlook the policy, of Aurelian, who was desirous of restoring
      and cementing the dependence of the provinces on the capital, by
      every means which could bind the interest or prejudices of any
      part of his subjects. 130


      1281 (return) [ It appears, nevertheless, that the vices and
      immoralities of Paul of Samosata had much weight in the sentence
      pronounced against him by the bishops. The object of the letter,
      addressed by the synod to the bishops of Rome and Alexandria, was
      to inform them of the change in the faith of Paul, the
      altercations and discussions to which it had given rise, as well
      as of his morals and the whole of his conduct. Euseb. Hist. Eccl.
      l. vii c. xxx—G.]


      129 (return) [ His heresy (like those of Noetus and Sabellius, in
      the same century) tended to confound the mysterious distinction
      of the divine persons. See Mosheim, p. 702, &c.]


      1291 (return) [ “Her favorite, (Zenobia’s,) Paul of Samosata,
      seems to have entertained some views of attempting a union
      between Judaism and Christianity; both parties rejected the
      unnatural alliance.” Hist. of Jews, iii. 175, and Jost.
      Geschichte der Israeliter, iv. 167. The protection of the severe
      Zenobia is the only circumstance which may raise a doubt of the
      notorious immorality of Paul.—M.]


      130 (return) [ Euseb. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. vii. c. 30. We are
      entirely indebted to him for the curious story of Paul of
      Samosata.]


      Amidst the frequent revolutions of the empire, the Christians
      still flourished in peace and prosperity; and notwithstanding a
      celebrated æra of martyrs has been deduced from the accession of
      Diocletian, 131 the new system of policy, introduced and
      maintained by the wisdom of that prince, continued, during more
      than eighteen years, to breathe the mildest and most liberal
      spirit of religious toleration. The mind of Diocletian himself
      was less adapted indeed to speculative inquiries, than to the
      active labors of war and government. His prudence rendered him
      averse to any great innovation, and though his temper was not
      very susceptible of zeal or enthusiasm, he always maintained an
      habitual regard for the ancient deities of the empire. But the
      leisure of the two empresses, of his wife Prisca, and of Valeria,
      his daughter, permitted them to listen with more attention and
      respect to the truths of Christianity, which in every age has
      acknowledged its important obligations to female devotion. 132
      The principal eunuchs, Lucian 133 and Dorotheus, Gorgonius and
      Andrew, who attended the person, possessed the favor, and
      governed the household of Diocletian, protected by their powerful
      influence the faith which they had embraced. Their example was
      imitated by many of the most considerable officers of the palace,
      who, in their respective stations, had the care of the Imperial
      ornaments, of the robes, of the furniture, of the jewels, and
      even of the private treasury; and, though it might sometimes be
      incumbent on them to accompany the emperor when he sacrificed in
      the temple, 134 they enjoyed, with their wives, their children,
      and their slaves, the free exercise of the Christian religion.
      Diocletian and his colleagues frequently conferred the most
      important offices on those persons who avowed their abhorrence
      for the worship of the gods, but who had displayed abilities
      proper for the service of the state. The bishops held an
      honorable rank in their respective provinces, and were treated
      with distinction and respect, not only by the people, but by the
      magistrates themselves. Almost in every city, the ancient
      churches were found insufficient to contain the increasing
      multitude of proselytes; and in their place more stately and
      capacious edifices were erected for the public worship of the
      faithful. The corruption of manners and principles, so forcibly
      lamented by Eusebius, 135 may be considered, not only as a
      consequence, but as a proof, of the liberty which the Christians
      enjoyed and abused under the reign of Diocletian. Prosperity had
      relaxed the nerves of discipline. Fraud, envy, and malice
      prevailed in every congregation. The presbyters aspired to the
      episcopal office, which every day became an object more worthy of
      their ambition. The bishops, who contended with each other for
      ecclesiastical preëminence, appeared by their conduct to claim a
      secular and tyrannical power in the church; and the lively faith
      which still distinguished the Christians from the Gentiles, was
      shown much less in their lives, than in their controversial
      writings.


      131 (return) [ The Æra of Martyrs, which is still in use among
      the Copts and the Abyssinians, must be reckoned from the 29th of
      August, A. D. 284; as the beginning of the Egyptian year was
      nineteen days earlier than the real accession of Diocletian. See
      Dissertation Preliminaire a l’Art de verifier les Dates. * Note:
      On the æra of martyrs see the very curious dissertations of Mons
      Letronne on some recently discovered inscriptions in Egypt and
      Nubis, p. 102, &c.—M.]


      132 (return) [ The expression of Lactantius, (de M. P. c. 15,)
      “sacrificio pollui coegit,” implies their antecedent conversion
      to the faith, but does not seem to justify the assertion of
      Mosheim, (p. 912,) that they had been privately baptized.]


      133 (return) [ M. de Tillemont (Mémoires Ecclésiastiques, tom. v.
      part i. p. 11, 12) has quoted from the Spicilegium of Dom Luc
      d’Archeri a very curious instruction which Bishop Theonas
      composed for the use of Lucian.]


      134 (return) [ Lactantius, de M. P. c. 10.]


      135 (return) [ Eusebius, Hist. Ecclesiast. l. viii. c. 1. The
      reader who consults the original will not accuse me of
      heightening the picture. Eusebius was about sixteen years of age
      at the accession of the emperor Diocletian.]


      Notwithstanding this seeming security, an attentive observer
      might discern some symptoms that threatened the church with a
      more violent persecution than any which she had yet endured. The
      zeal and rapid progress of the Christians awakened the
      Polytheists from their supine indifference in the cause of those
      deities, whom custom and education had taught them to revere. The
      mutual provocations of a religious war, which had already
      continued above two hundred years, exasperated the animosity of
      the contending parties. The Pagans were incensed at the rashness
      of a recent and obscure sect, which presumed to accuse their
      countrymen of error, and to devote their ancestors to eternal
      misery. The habits of justifying the popular mythology against
      the invectives of an implacable enemy, produced in their minds
      some sentiments of faith and reverence for a system which they
      had been accustomed to consider with the most careless levity.
      The supernatural powers assumed by the church inspired at the
      same time terror and emulation. The followers of the established
      religion intrenched themselves behind a similar fortification of
      prodigies; invented new modes of sacrifice, of expiation, and of
      initiation; 136 attempted to revive the credit of their expiring
      oracles; 137 and listened with eager credulity to every impostor,
      who flattered their prejudices by a tale of wonders. 138 Both
      parties seemed to acknowledge the truth of those miracles which
      were claimed by their adversaries; and while they were contented
      with ascribing them to the arts of magic, and to the power of
      dæmons, they mutually concurred in restoring and establishing the
      reign of superstition. 139 Philosophy, her most dangerous enemy,
      was now converted into her most useful ally. The groves of the
      academy, the gardens of Epicurus, and even the portico of the
      Stoics, were almost deserted, as so many different schools of
      scepticism or impiety; 140 and many among the Romans were
      desirous that the writings of Cicero should be condemned and
      suppressed by the authority of the senate. 141 The prevailing
      sect of the new Platonicians judged it prudent to connect
      themselves with the priests, whom perhaps they despised, against
      the Christians, whom they had reason to fear. These fashionable
      Philosophers prosecuted the design of extracting allegorical
      wisdom from the fictions of the Greek poets; instituted
      mysterious rites of devotion for the use of their chosen
      disciples; recommended the worship of the ancient gods as the
      emblems or ministers of the Supreme Deity, and composed against
      the faith of the gospel many elaborate treatises, 142 which have
      since been committed to the flames by the prudence of orthodox
      emperors. 143


      136 (return) [ We might quote, among a great number of instances,
      the mysterious worship of Mythras, and the Taurobolia; the latter
      of which became fashionable in the time of the Antonines, (see a
      Dissertation of M. de Boze, in the Mémoires de l’Académie des
      Inscriptions, tom. ii. p. 443.) The romance of Apuleius is as
      full of devotion as of satire. * Note: On the extraordinary
      progress of the Mahriac rites, in the West, see De Guigniaud’s
      translation of Creuzer, vol. i. p. 365, and Note 9, tom. i. part
      2, p. 738, &c.—M.]


      137 (return) [ The impostor Alexander very strongly recommended
      the oracle of Trophonius at Mallos, and those of Apollo at Claros
      and Miletus, (Lucian, tom. ii. p. 236, edit. Reitz.) The last of
      these, whose singular history would furnish a very curious
      episode, was consulted by Diocletian before he published his
      edicts of persecution, (Lactantius, de M. P. c. 11.)]


      138 (return) [ Besides the ancient stories of Pythagoras and
      Aristeas, the cures performed at the shrine of Æsculapius, and
      the fables related of Apollonius of Tyana, were frequently
      opposed to the miracles of Christ; though I agree with Dr.
      Lardner, (see Testimonies, vol. iii. p. 253, 352,) that when
      Philostratus composed the life of Apollonius, he had no such
      intention.]


      139 (return) [ It is seriously to be lamented, that the Christian
      fathers, by acknowledging the supernatural, or, as they deem it,
      the infernal part of Paganism, destroy with their own hands the
      great advantage which we might otherwise derive from the liberal
      concessions of our adversaries.]


      140 (return) [ Julian (p. 301, edit. Spanheim) expresses a pious
      joy, that the providence of the gods had extinguished the impious
      sects, and for the most part destroyed the books of the
      Pyrrhonians and Epicuræans, which had been very numerous, since
      Epicurus himself composed no less than 300 volumes. See Diogenes
      Laertius, l. x. c. 26.]


      141 (return) [ Cumque alios audiam mussitare indignanter, et
      dicere opportere statui per Senatum, aboleantur ut hæc scripta,
      quibus Christiana Religio comprobetur, et vetustatis opprimatur
      auctoritas. Arnobius adversus Gentes, l. iii. p. 103, 104. He
      adds very properly, Erroris convincite Ciceronem... nam
      intercipere scripta, et publicatam velle submergere lectionem,
      non est Deum defendere sed veritatis testificationem timere.]


      142 (return) [ Lactantius (Divin. Institut. l. v. c. 2, 3) gives
      a very clear and spirited account of two of these philosophic
      adversaries of the faith. The large treatise of Porphyry against
      the Christians consisted of thirty books, and was composed in
      Sicily about the year 270.]


      143 (return) [ See Socrates, Hist. Ecclesiast. l. i. c. 9, and
      Codex Justinian. l. i. i. l. s.]


      Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
      Constantine.—Part VI.


      Although the policy of Diocletian and the humanity of Constantius
      inclined them to preserve inviolate the maxims of toleration, it
      was soon discovered that their two associates, Maximian and
      Galerius, entertained the most implacable aversion for the name
      and religion of the Christians. The minds of those princes had
      never been enlightened by science; education had never softened
      their temper. They owed their greatness to their swords, and in
      their most elevated fortune they still retained their
      superstitious prejudices of soldiers and peasants. In the general
      administration of the provinces they obeyed the laws which their
      benefactor had established; but they frequently found occasions
      of exercising within their camp and palaces a secret persecution,
      144 for which the imprudent zeal of the Christians sometimes
      offered the most specious pretences. A sentence of death was
      executed upon Maximilianus, an African youth, who had been
      produced by his own father 1441 before the magistrate as a
      sufficient and legal recruit, but who obstinately persisted in
      declaring, that his conscience would not permit him to embrace
      the profession of a soldier. 145 It could scarcely be expected
      that any government should suffer the action of Marcellus the
      Centurion to pass with impunity. On the day of a public festival,
      that officer threw away his belt, his arms, and the ensigns of
      his office, and exclaimed with a loud voice, that he would obey
      none but Jesus Christ the eternal King, and that he renounced
      forever the use of carnal weapons, and the service of an
      idolatrous master. The soldiers, as soon as they recovered from
      their astonishment, secured the person of Marcellus. He was
      examined in the city of Tingi by the president of that part of
      Mauritania; and as he was convicted by his own confession, he was
      condemned and beheaded for the crime of desertion. 146 Examples
      of such a nature savor much less of religious persecution than of
      martial or even civil law; but they served to alienate the mind
      of the emperors, to justify the severity of Galerius, who
      dismissed a great number of Christian officers from their
      employments; and to authorize the opinion, that a sect of
      enthusiastics, which avowed principles so repugnant to the public
      safety, must either remain useless, or would soon become
      dangerous, subjects of the empire.


      144 (return) [ Eusebius, l. viii. c. 4, c. 17. He limits the
      number of military martyrs, by a remarkable expression, of which
      neither his Latin nor French translator have rendered the energy.
      Notwithstanding the authority of Eusebius, and the silence of
      Lactantius, Ambrose, Sulpicius, Orosius, &c., it has been long
      believed, that the Thebæan legion, consisting of 6000 Christians,
      suffered martyrdom by the order of Maximian, in the valley of the
      Pennine Alps. The story was first published about the middle of
      the 5th century, by Eucherius, bishop of Lyons, who received it
      from certain persons, who received it from Isaac, bishop of
      Geneva, who is said to have received it from Theodore, bishop of
      Octodurum. The abbey of St. Maurice still subsists, a rich
      monument of the credulity of Sigismund, king of Burgundy. See an
      excellent Dissertation in xxxvith volume of the Bibliothèque
      Raisonnée, p. 427-454.]


      1441 (return) [ M. Guizot criticizes Gibbon’s account of this
      incident. He supposes that Maximilian was not “produced by his
      father as a recruit,” but was obliged to appear by the law, which
      compelled the sons of soldiers to serve at 21 years old. Was not
      this a law of Constantine? Neither does this circumstance appear
      in the acts. His father had clearly expected him to serve, as he
      had bought him a new dress for the occasion; yet he refused to
      force the conscience of his son. and when Maximilian was
      condemned to death, the father returned home in joy, blessing God
      for having bestowed upon him such a son.—M.]


      145 (return) [ See the Acta Sincera, p. 299. The accounts of his
      martyrdom and that of Marcellus, bear every mark of truth and
      authenticity.]


      146 (return) [ Acta Sincera, p. 302. * Note: M. Guizot here
      justly observes, that it was the necessity of sacrificing to the
      gods, which induced Marcellus to act in this manner.—M.]


      After the success of the Persian war had raised the hopes and the
      reputation of Galerius, he passed a winter with Diocletian in the
      palace of Nicomedia; and the fate of Christianity became the
      object of their secret consultations. 147 The experienced emperor
      was still inclined to pursue measures of lenity; and though he
      readily consented to exclude the Christians from holding any
      employments in the household or the army, he urged in the
      strongest terms the danger as well as cruelty of shedding the
      blood of those deluded fanatics. Galerius at length extorted 1471
      from him the permission of summoning a council, composed of a few
      persons the most distinguished in the civil and military
      departments of the state.


      The important question was agitated in their presence, and those
      ambitious courtiers easily discerned, that it was incumbent on
      them to second, by their eloquence, the importunate violence of
      the Cæsar. It may be presumed, that they insisted on every topic
      which might interest the pride, the piety, or the fears, of their
      sovereign in the destruction of Christianity. Perhaps they
      represented, that the glorious work of the deliverance of the
      empire was left imperfect, as long as an independent people was
      permitted to subsist and multiply in the heart of the provinces.
      The Christians, (it might specially be alleged,) renouncing the
      gods and the institutions of Rome, had constituted a distinct
      republic, which might yet be suppressed before it had acquired
      any military force; but which was already governed by its own
      laws and magistrates, was possessed of a public treasure, and was
      intimately connected in all its parts by the frequent assemblies
      of the bishops, to whose decrees their numerous and opulent
      congregations yielded an implicit obedience. Arguments like these
      may seem to have determined the reluctant mind of Diocletian to
      embrace a new system of persecution; but though we may suspect,
      it is not in our power to relate, the secret intrigues of the
      palace, the private views and resentments, the jealousy of women
      or eunuchs, and all those trifling but decisive causes which so
      often influence the fate of empires, and the councils of the
      wisest monarchs. 148


      147 (return) [ De M. P. c. 11. Lactantius (or whoever was the
      author of this little treatise) was, at that time, an inhabitant
      of Nicomedia; but it seems difficult to conceive how he could
      acquire so accurate a knowledge of what passed in the Imperial
      cabinet. Note: * Lactantius, who was subsequently chosen by
      Constantine to educate Crispus, might easily have learned these
      details from Constantine himself, already of sufficient age to
      interest himself in the affairs of the government, and in a
      position to obtain the best information.—G. This assumes the
      doubtful point of the authorship of the Treatise.—M.]


      1471 (return) [ This permission was not extorted from Diocletian;
      he took the step of his own accord. Lactantius says, in truth,
      Nec tamen deflectere potuit (Diocletianus) præcipitis hominis
      insaniam; placuit ergo amicorum sententiam experiri. (De Mort.
      Pers. c. 11.) But this measure was in accordance with the
      artificial character of Diocletian, who wished to have the
      appearance of doing good by his own impulse and evil by the
      impulse of others. Nam erat hujus malitiæ, cum bonum quid facere
      decrevisse sine consilio faciebat, ut ipse laudaretur. Cum autem
      malum. quoniam id reprehendendum sciebat, in consilium multos
      advocabat, ut alioram culpæ adscriberetur quicquid ipse
      deliquerat. Lact. ib. Eutropius says likewise, Miratus callide
      fuit, sagax præterea et admodum subtilis ingenio, et qui
      severitatem suam aliena invidia vellet explere. Eutrop. ix. c.
      26.—G.——The manner in which the coarse and unfriendly pencil of
      the author of the Treatise de Mort. Pers. has drawn the character
      of Diocletian, seems inconsistent with this profound subtilty.
      Many readers will perhaps agree with Gibbon.—M.]


      148 (return) [ The only circumstance which we can discover, is
      the devotion and jealousy of the mother of Galerius. She is
      described by Lactantius, as Deorum montium cultrix; mulier
      admodum superstitiosa. She had a great influence over her son,
      and was offended by the disregard of some of her Christian
      servants. * Note: This disregard consisted in the Christians
      fasting and praying instead of participating in the banquets and
      sacrifices which she celebrated with the Pagans. Dapibus
      sacrificabat pœne quotidie ac vicariis suis epulis exhibebat.
      Christiani abstinebant, et illa cum gentibus epulante, jejuniis
      hi et oratiomibus insisteban; hine concepit odium Lact de Hist.
      Pers. c. 11.—G.]


      The pleasure of the emperors was at length signified to the
      Christians, who, during the course of this melancholy winter, had
      expected, with anxiety, the result of so many secret
      consultations. The twenty-third of February, which coincided with
      the Roman festival of the Terminalia, 149 was appointed (whether
      from accident or design) to set bounds to the progress of
      Christianity. At the earliest dawn of day, the Prætorian præfect,
      150 accompanied by several generals, tribunes, and officers of
      the revenue, repaired to the principal church of Nicomedia, which
      was situated on an eminence in the most populous and beautiful
      part of the city. The doors were instantly broke open; they
      rushed into the sanctuary; and as they searched in vain for some
      visible object of worship, they were obliged to content
      themselves with committing to the flames the volumes of the holy
      Scripture. The ministers of Diocletian were followed by a
      numerous body of guards and pioneers, who marched in order of
      battle, and were provided with all the instruments used in the
      destruction of fortified cities. By their incessant labor, a
      sacred edifice, which towered above the Imperial palace, and had
      long excited the indignation and envy of the Gentiles, was in a
      few hours levelled with the ground. 151


      149 (return) [ The worship and festival of the god Terminus are
      elegantly illustrated by M. de Boze, Mém. de l’Académie des
      Inscriptions, tom. i. p. 50.]


      150 (return) [ In our only MS. of Lactantius, we read
      _profectus;_ but reason, and the authority of all the critics,
      allow us, instead of that word, which destroys the sense of the
      passage, to substitute _prœfectus_.]


      151 (return) [ Lactantius, de M. P. c. 12, gives a very lively
      picture of the destruction of the church.]


      The next day the general edict of persecution was published; 152
      and though Diocletian, still averse to the effusion of blood, had
      moderated the fury of Galerius, who proposed, that every one
      refusing to offer sacrifice should immediately be burnt alive,
      the penalties inflicted on the obstinacy of the Christians might
      be deemed sufficiently rigorous and effectual. It was enacted,
      that their churches, in all the provinces of the empire, should
      be demolished to their foundations; and the punishment of death
      was denounced against all who should presume to hold any secret
      assemblies for the purpose of religious worship. The
      philosophers, who now assumed the unworthy office of directing
      the blind zeal of persecution, had diligently studied the nature
      and genius of the Christian religion; and as they were not
      ignorant that the speculative doctrines of the faith were
      supposed to be contained in the writings of the prophets, of the
      evangelists, and of the apostles, they most probably suggested
      the order, that the bishops and presbyters should deliver all
      their sacred books into the hands of the magistrates; who were
      commanded, under the severest penalties, to burn them in a public
      and solemn manner. By the same edict, the property of the church
      was at once confiscated; and the several parts of which it might
      consist were either sold to the highest bidder, united to the
      Imperial domain, bestowed on the cities and corporations, or
      granted to the solicitations of rapacious courtiers. After taking
      such effectual measures to abolish the worship, and to dissolve
      the government of the Christians, it was thought necessary to
      subject to the most intolerable hardships the condition of those
      perverse individuals who should still reject the religion of
      nature, of Rome, and of their ancestors. Persons of a liberal
      birth were declared incapable of holding any honors or
      employments; slaves were forever deprived of the hopes of
      freedom, and the whole body of the people were put out of the
      protection of the law. The judges were authorized to hear and to
      determine every action that was brought against a Christian. But
      the Christians were not permitted to complain of any injury which
      they themselves had suffered; and thus those unfortunate
      sectaries were exposed to the severity, while they were excluded
      from the benefits, of public justice. This new species of
      martyrdom, so painful and lingering, so obscure and ignominious,
      was, perhaps, the most proper to weary the constancy of the
      faithful: nor can it be doubted that the passions and interest of
      mankind were disposed on this occasion to second the designs of
      the emperors. But the policy of a well-ordered government must
      sometimes have interposed in behalf of the oppressed Christians;
      1521 nor was it possible for the Roman princes entirely to remove
      the apprehension of punishment, or to connive at every act of
      fraud and violence, without exposing their own authority and the
      rest of their subjects to the most alarming dangers. 153


      152 (return) [ Mosheim, (p. 922—926,) from man scattered passages
      of Lactantius and Eusebius, has collected a very just and
      accurate notion of this edict though he sometimes deviates into
      conjecture and refinement.]


      1521 (return) [ This wants proof. The edict of Diocletian was
      executed in all its right during the rest of his reign. Euseb.
      Hist. Eccl. l viii. c. 13.—G.]


      153 (return) [ Many ages afterwards, Edward J. practised, with
      great success, the same mode of persecution against the clergy of
      England. See Hume’s History of England, vol. ii. p. 300, last 4to
      edition.]


      This edict was scarcely exhibited to the public view, in the most
      conspicuous place of Nicomedia, before it was torn down by the
      hands of a Christian, who expressed at the same time, by the
      bitterest invectives, his contempt as well as abhorrence for such
      impious and tyrannical governors. His offence, according to the
      mildest laws, amounted to treason, and deserved death. And if it
      be true that he was a person of rank and education, those
      circumstances could serve only to aggravate his guilt. He was
      burnt, or rather roasted, by a slow fire; and his executioners,
      zealous to revenge the personal insult which had been offered to
      the emperors, exhausted every refinement of cruelty, without
      being able to subdue his patience, or to alter the steady and
      insulting smile which in his dying agonies he still preserved in
      his countenance. The Christians, though they confessed that his
      conduct had not been strictly conformable to the laws of
      prudence, admired the divine fervor of his zeal; and the
      excessive commendations which they lavished on the memory of
      their hero and martyr, contributed to fix a deep impression of
      terror and hatred in the mind of Diocletian. 154


      154 (return) [ Lactantius only calls him quidam, et si non recte,
      magno tamer animo, &c., c. 12. Eusebius (l. viii. c. 5) adorns
      him with secular honora Neither have condescended to mention his
      name; but the Greeks celebrate his memory under that of John. See
      Tillemont, Memones Ecclésiastiques, tom. v. part ii. p. 320.]


      His fears were soon alarmed by the view of a danger from which he
      very narrowly escaped. Within fifteen days the palace of
      Nicomedia, and even the bed-chamber of Diocletian, were twice in
      flames; and though both times they were extinguished without any
      material damage, the singular repetition of the fire was justly
      considered as an evident proof that it had not been the effect of
      chance or negligence. The suspicion naturally fell on the
      Christians; and it was suggested, with some degree of
      probability, that those desperate fanatics, provoked by their
      present sufferings, and apprehensive of impending calamities, had
      entered into a conspiracy with their faithful brethren, the
      eunuchs of the palace, against the lives of two emperors, whom
      they detested as the irreconcilable enemies of the church of God.


      Jealousy and resentment prevailed in every breast, but especially
      in that of Diocletian. A great number of persons, distinguished
      either by the offices which they had filled, or by the favor
      which they had enjoyed, were thrown into prison. Every mode of
      torture was put in practice, and the court, as well as city, was
      polluted with many bloody executions. 155 But as it was found
      impossible to extort any discovery of this mysterious
      transaction, it seems incumbent on us either to presume the
      innocence, or to admire the resolution, of the sufferers. A few
      days afterwards Galerius hastily withdrew himself from Nicomedia,
      declaring, that if he delayed his departure from that devoted
      palace, he should fall a sacrifice to the rage of the Christians.


      The ecclesiastical historians, from whom alone we derive a
      partial and imperfect knowledge of this persecution, are at a
      loss how to account for the fears and dangers of the emperors.
      Two of these writers, a prince and a rhetorician, were
      eye-witnesses of the fire of Nicomedia. The one ascribes it to
      lightning, and the divine wrath; the other affirms, that it was
      kindled by the malice of Galerius himself. 156


      155 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 13, 14. Potentissimi
      quondam Eunuchi necati, per quos Palatium et ipse constabat.
      Eusebius (l. viii. c. 6) mentions the cruel executions of the
      eunuchs, Gorgonius and Dorotheus, and of Anthimius, bishop of
      Nicomedia; and both those writers describe, in a vague but
      tragical manner, the horrid scenes which were acted even in the
      Imperial presence.]


      156 (return) [ See Lactantius, Eusebius, and Constantine, ad
      Cœtum Sanctorum, c. xxv. Eusebius confesses his ignorance of the
      cause of this fire. Note: As the history of these times affords
      us no example of any attempts made by the Christians against
      their persecutors, we have no reason, not the slightest
      probability, to attribute to them the fire in the palace; and the
      authority of Constantine and Lactantius remains to explain it. M.
      de Tillemont has shown how they can be reconciled. Hist. des
      Empereurs, Vie de Diocletian, xix.—G. Had it been done by a
      Christian, it would probably have been a fanatic, who would have
      avowed and gloried in it. Tillemont’s supposition that the fire
      was first caused by lightning, and fed and increased by the
      malice of Galerius, seems singularly improbable.—M.]


      As the edict against the Christians was designed for a general
      law of the whole empire, and as Diocletian and Galerius, though
      they might not wait for the consent, were assured of the
      concurrence, of the Western princes, it would appear more
      consonant to our ideas of policy, that the governors of all the
      provinces should have received secret instructions to publish, on
      one and the same day, this declaration of war within their
      respective departments. It was at least to be expected, that the
      convenience of the public highways and established posts would
      have enabled the emperors to transmit their orders with the
      utmost despatch from the palace of Nicomedia to the extremities
      of the Roman world; and that they would not have suffered fifty
      days to elapse, before the edict was published in Syria, and near
      four months before it was signified to the cities of Africa. 157


      This delay may perhaps be imputed to the cautious temper of
      Diocletian, who had yielded a reluctant consent to the measures
      of persecution, and who was desirous of trying the experiment
      under his more immediate eye, before he gave way to the disorders
      and discontent which it must inevitably occasion in the distant
      provinces. At first, indeed, the magistrates were restrained from
      the effusion of blood; but the use of every other severity was
      permitted, and even recommended to their zeal; nor could the
      Christians, though they cheerfully resigned the ornaments of
      their churches, resolve to interrupt their religious assemblies,
      or to deliver their sacred books to the flames. The pious
      obstinacy of Felix, an African bishop, appears to have
      embarrassed the subordinate ministers of the government. The
      curator of his city sent him in chains to the proconsul. The
      proconsul transmitted him to the Prætorian præfect of Italy; and
      Felix, who disdained even to give an evasive answer, was at
      length beheaded at Venusia, in Lucania, a place on which the
      birth of Horace has conferred fame. 158 This precedent, and
      perhaps some Imperial rescript, which was issued in consequence
      of it, appeared to authorize the governors of provinces, in
      punishing with death the refusal of the Christians to deliver up
      their sacred books. There were undoubtedly many persons who
      embraced this opportunity of obtaining the crown of martyrdom;
      but there were likewise too many who purchased an ignominious
      life, by discovering and betraying the holy Scripture into the
      hands of infidels. A great number even of bishops and presbyters
      acquired, by this criminal compliance, the opprobrious epithet of
      _Traditors;_ and their offence was productive of much present
      scandal and of much future discord in the African church. 159


      157 (return) [ Tillemont, Mémoires Ecclesiast. tom. v. part i. p.
      43.]


      158 (return) [ See the Acta Sincera of Ruinart, p. 353; those of
      Felix of Thibara, or Tibiur, appear much less corrupted than in
      the other editions, which afford a lively specimen of legendary
      license.]


      159 (return) [ See the first book of Optatus of Milevis against
      the Donatiste, Paris, 1700, edit. Dupin. He lived under the reign
      of Valens.]


      The copies as well as the versions of Scripture, were already so
      multiplied in the empire, that the most severe inquisition could
      no longer be attended with any fatal consequences; and even the
      sacrifice of those volumes, which, in every congregation, were
      preserved for public use, required the consent of some
      treacherous and unworthy Christians. But the ruin of the churches
      was easily effected by the authority of the government, and by
      the labor of the Pagans. In some provinces, however, the
      magistrates contented themselves with shutting up the places of
      religious worship. In others, they more literally complied with
      the terms of the edict; and after taking away the doors, the
      benches, and the pulpit, which they burnt as it were in a funeral
      pile, they completely demolished the remainder of the edifice.
      160 It is perhaps to this melancholy occasion that we should
      apply a very remarkable story, which is related with so many
      circumstances of variety and improbability, that it serves rather
      to excite than to satisfy our curiosity. In a small town in
      Phrygia, of whose name as well as situation we are left ignorant,
      it should seem that the magistrates and the body of the people
      had embraced the Christian faith; and as some resistance might be
      apprehended to the execution of the edict, the governor of the
      province was supported by a numerous detachment of legionaries.
      On their approach the citizens threw themselves into the church,
      with the resolution either of defending by arms that sacred
      edifice, or of perishing in its ruins. They indignantly rejected
      the notice and permission which was given them to retire, till
      the soldiers, provoked by their obstinate refusal, set fire to
      the building on all sides, and consumed, by this extraordinary
      kind of martyrdom, a great number of Phrygians, with their wives
      and children. 161


      160 (return) [ The ancient monuments, published at the end of
      Optatus, p. 261, &c. describe, in a very circumstantial manner,
      the proceedings of the governors in the destruction of churches.
      They made a minute inventory of the plate, &c., which they found
      in them. That of the church of Cirta, in Numidia, is still
      extant. It consisted of two chalices of gold, and six of silver;
      six urns, one kettle, seven lamps, all likewise of silver;
      besides a large quantity of brass utensils, and wearing apparel.]


      161 (return) [ Lactantius (Institut. Divin. v. 11) confines the
      calamity to the _conventiculum_, with its congregation. Eusebius
      (viii. 11) extends it to a whole city, and introduces something
      very like a regular siege. His ancient Latin translator, Rufinus,
      adds the important circumstance of the permission given to the
      inhabitants of retiring from thence. As Phrygia reached to the
      confines of Isauria, it is possible that the restless temper of
      those independent barbarians may have contributed to this
      misfortune. Note: Universum populum. Lact. Inst. Div. v. 11.—G.]


      Some slight disturbances, though they were suppressed almost as
      soon as excited, in Syria and the frontiers of Armenia, afforded
      the enemies of the church a very plausible occasion to insinuate,
      that those troubles had been secretly fomented by the intrigues
      of the bishops, who had already forgotten their ostentatious
      professions of passive and unlimited obedience. 162


      The resentment, or the fears, of Diocletian, at length
      transported him beyond the bounds of moderation, which he had
      hitherto preserved, and he declared, in a series of cruel edicts,
      1621 his intention of abolishing the Christian name. By the first
      of these edicts, the governors of the provinces were directed to
      apprehend all persons of the ecclesiastical order; and the
      prisons, destined for the vilest criminals, were soon filled with
      a multitude of bishops, presbyters, deacons, readers, and
      exorcists. By a second edict, the magistrates were commanded to
      employ every method of severity, which might reclaim them from
      their odious superstition, and oblige them to return to the
      established worship of the gods. This rigorous order was
      extended, by a subsequent edict, to the whole body of Christians,
      who were exposed to a violent and general persecution. 163


      Instead of those salutary restraints, which had required the
      direct and solemn testimony of an accuser, it became the duty as
      well as the interest of the Imperial officers to discover, to
      pursue, and to torment the most obnoxious among the faithful.
      Heavy penalties were denounced against all who should presume to
      save a prescribed sectary from the just indignation of the gods,
      and of the emperors. Yet, notwithstanding the severity of this
      law, the virtuous courage of many of the Pagans, in concealing
      their friends or relations, affords an honorable proof, that the
      rage of superstition had not extinguished in their minds the
      sentiments of nature and humanity. 164


      162 (return) [ Eusebius, l. viii. c. 6. M. de Valois (with some
      probability) thinks that he has discovered the Syrian rebellion
      in an oration of Libanius; and that it was a rash attempt of the
      tribune Eugenius, who with only five hundred men seized Antioch,
      and might perhaps allure the Christians by the promise of
      religious toleration. From Eusebius, (l. ix. c. 8,) as well as
      from Moses of Chorene, (Hist. Armen. l. ii. 77, &c.,) it may be
      inferred, that Christianity was already introduced into Armenia.]


      1621 (return) [ He had already passed them in his first edict. It
      does not appear that resentment or fear had any share in the new
      persecutions: perhaps they originated in superstition, and a
      specious apparent respect for its ministers. The oracle of
      Apollo, consulted by Diocletian, gave no answer; and said that
      just men hindered it from speaking. Constantine, who assisted at
      the ceremony, affirms, with an oath, that when questioned about
      these men, the high priest named the Christians. “The Emperor
      eagerly seized on this answer; and drew against the innocent a
      sword, destined only to punish the guilty: he instantly issued
      edicts, written, if I may use the expression, with a poniard; and
      ordered the judges to employ all their skill to invent new modes
      of punishment. Euseb. Vit Constant. l. ii c 54.”—G.]


      163 (return) [ See Mosheim, p. 938: the text of Eusebius very
      plainly shows that the governors, whose powers were enlarged, not
      restrained, by the new laws, could punish with death the most
      obstinate Christians as an example to their brethren.]


      164 (return) [ Athanasius, p. 833, ap. Tillemont, Mém.
      Ecclesiast. tom v part i. 90.]


      Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
      Constantine.—Part VII.


      Diocletian had no sooner published his edicts against the
      Christians, than, as if he had been desirous of committing to
      other hands the work of persecution, he divested himself of the
      Imperial purple. The character and situation of his colleagues
      and successors sometimes urged them to enforce and sometimes
      inclined them to suspend, the execution of these rigorous laws;
      nor can we acquire a just and distinct idea of this important
      period of ecclesiastical history, unless we separately consider
      the state of Christianity, in the different parts of the empire,
      during the space of ten years, which elapsed between the first
      edicts of Diocletian and the final peace of the church.


      The mild and humane temper of Constantius was averse to the
      oppression of any part of his subjects. The principal offices of
      his palace were exercised by Christians. He loved their persons,
      esteemed their fidelity, and entertained not any dislike to their
      religious principles. But as long as Constantius remained in the
      subordinate station of Cæsar, it was not in his power openly to
      reject the edicts of Diocletian, or to disobey the commands of
      Maximian. His authority contributed, however, to alleviate the
      sufferings which he pitied and abhorred. He consented with
      reluctance to the ruin of the churches; but he ventured to
      protect the Christians themselves from the fury of the populace,
      and from the rigor of the laws. The provinces of Gaul (under
      which we may probably include those of Britain) were indebted for
      the singular tranquillity which they enjoyed, to the gentle
      interposition of their sovereign. 165 But Datianus, the president
      or governor of Spain, actuated either by zeal or policy, chose
      rather to execute the public edicts of the emperors, than to
      understand the secret intentions of Constantius; and it can
      scarcely be doubted, that his provincial administration was
      stained with the blood of a few martyrs. 166


      The elevation of Constantius to the supreme and independent
      dignity of Augustus, gave a free scope to the exercise of his
      virtues, and the shortness of his reign did not prevent him from
      establishing a system of toleration, of which he left the precept
      and the example to his son Constantine. His fortunate son, from
      the first moment of his accession, declaring himself the
      protector of the church, at length deserved the appellation of
      the first emperor who publicly professed and established the
      Christian religion. The motives of his conversion, as they may
      variously be deduced from benevolence, from policy, from
      conviction, or from remorse, and the progress of the revolution,
      which, under his powerful influence and that of his sons,
      rendered Christianity the reigning religion of the Roman empire,
      will form a very interesting and important chapter in the present
      volume of this history. At present it may be sufficient to
      observe, that every victory of Constantine was productive of some
      relief or benefit to the church.


      165 (return) [ Eusebius, l. viii. c. 13. Lactantius de M. P. c.
      15. Dodwell (Dissertat. Cyprian. xi. 75) represents them as
      inconsistent with each other. But the former evidently speaks of
      Constantius in the station of Cæsar, and the latter of the same
      prince in the rank of Augustus.]


      166 (return) [ Datianus is mentioned, in Gruter’s Inscriptions,
      as having determined the limits between the territories of Pax
      Julia, and those of Ebora, both cities in the southern part of
      Lusitania. If we recollect the neighborhood of those places to
      Cape St. Vincent, we may suspect that the celebrated deacon and
      martyr of that name had been inaccurately assigned by Prudentius,
      &c., to Saragossa, or Valentia. See the pompous history of his
      sufferings, in the Mémoires de Tillemont, tom. v. part ii. p.
      58-85. Some critics are of opinion, that the department of
      Constantius, as Cæsar, did not include Spain, which still
      continued under the immediate jurisdiction of Maximian.]


      The provinces of Italy and Africa experienced a short but violent
      persecution. The rigorous edicts of Diocletian were strictly and
      cheerfully executed by his associate Maximian, who had long hated
      the Christians, and who delighted in acts of blood and violence.
      In the autumn of the first year of the persecution, the two
      emperors met at Rome to celebrate their triumph; several
      oppressive laws appear to have issued from their secret
      consultations, and the diligence of the magistrates was animated
      by the presence of their sovereigns. After Diocletian had
      divested himself of the purple, Italy and Africa were
      administered under the name of Severus, and were exposed, without
      defence, to the implacable resentment of his master Galerius.
      Among the martyrs of Rome, Adauctus deserves the notice of
      posterity. He was of a noble family in Italy, and had raised
      himself, through the successive honors of the palace, to the
      important office of treasurer of the private Jemesnes. Adauctus
      is the more remarkable for being the only person of rank and
      distinction who appears to have suffered death, during the whole
      course of this general persecution. 167


      167 (return) [ Eusebius, l. viii. c. 11. Gruter, Inscrip. p.
      1171, No. 18. Rufinus has mistaken the office of Adauctus, as
      well as the place of his martyrdom. * Note: M. Guizot suggests
      the powerful cunuchs of the palace. Dorotheus, Gorgonius, and
      Andrew, admitted by Gibbon himself to have been put to death, p.
      66.]


      The revolt of Maxentius immediately restored peace to the
      churches of Italy and Africa; and the same tyrant who oppressed
      every other class of his subjects, showed himself just, humane,
      and even partial, towards the afflicted Christians. He depended
      on their gratitude and affection, and very naturally presumed,
      that the injuries which they had suffered, and the dangers which
      they still apprehended from his most inveterate enemy, would
      secure the fidelity of a party already considerable by their
      numbers and opulence. 168 Even the conduct of Maxentius towards
      the bishops of Rome and Carthage may be considered as the proof
      of his toleration, since it is probable that the most orthodox
      princes would adopt the same measures with regard to their
      established clergy. Marcellus, the former of these prelates, had
      thrown the capital into confusion, by the severe penance which he
      imposed on a great number of Christians, who, during the late
      persecution, had renounced or dissembled their religion. The rage
      of faction broke out in frequent and violent seditions; the blood
      of the faithful was shed by each other’s hands, and the exile of
      Marcellus, whose prudence seems to have been less eminent than
      his zeal, was found to be the only measure capable of restoring
      peace to the distracted church of Rome. 169 The behavior of
      Mensurius, bishop of Carthage, appears to have been still more
      reprehensible. A deacon of that city had published a libel
      against the emperor. The offender took refuge in the episcopal
      palace; and though it was somewhat early to advance any claims of
      ecclesiastical immunities, the bishop refused to deliver him up
      to the officers of justice. For this treasonable resistance,
      Mensurius was summoned to court, and instead of receiving a legal
      sentence of death or banishment, he was permitted, after a short
      examination, to return to his diocese. 170 Such was the happy
      condition of the Christian subjects of Maxentius, that whenever
      they were desirous of procuring for their own use any bodies of
      martyrs, they were obliged to purchase them from the most distant
      provinces of the East. A story is related of Aglae, a Roman lady,
      descended from a consular family, and possessed of so ample an
      estate, that it required the management of seventy-three
      stewards. Among these Boniface was the favorite of his mistress;
      and as Aglae mixed love with devotion, it is reported that he was
      admitted to share her bed. Her fortune enabled her to gratify the
      pious desire of obtaining some sacred relics from the East. She
      intrusted Boniface with a considerable sum of gold, and a large
      quantity of aromatics; and her lover, attended by twelve horsemen
      and three covered chariots, undertook a remote pilgrimage, as far
      as Tarsus in Cilicia. 171


      168 (return) [ Eusebius, l. viii. c. 14. But as Maxentius was
      vanquished by Constantine, it suited the purpose of Lactantius to
      place his death among those of the persecutors. * Note: M. Guizot
      directly contradicts this statement of Gibbon, and appeals to
      Eusebius. Maxentius, who assumed the power in Italy, pretended at
      first to be a Christian, to gain the favor of the Roman people;
      he ordered his ministers to cease to persecute the Christians,
      affecting a hypocritical piety, in order to appear more mild than
      his predecessors; but his actions soon proved that he was very
      different from what they had at first hoped. The actions of
      Maxentius were those of a cruel tyrant, but not those of a
      persecutor: the Christians, like the rest of his subjects,
      suffered from his vices, but they were not oppressed as a sect.
      Christian females were exposed to his lusts, as well as to the
      brutal violence of his colleague Maximian, but they were not
      selected as Christians.—M.]


      169 (return) [ The epitaph of Marcellus is to be found in Gruter,
      Inscrip. p 1172, No. 3, and it contains all that we know of his
      history. Marcellinus and Marcellus, whose names follow in the
      list of popes, are supposed by many critics to be different
      persons; but the learned Abbé de Longuerue was convinced that
      they were one and the same.

      Veridicus rector lapsis quia crimina flere
      Prædixit miseris, fuit omnibus hostis amarus.
      Hinc furor, hinc odium; sequitur discordia, lites,
      Seditio, cædes; solvuntur fœdera pacis.
      Crimen ob alterius, Christum qui in pace negavit
      Finibus expulsus patriæ est feritate Tyranni.
      Hæc breviter Damasus voluit comperta referre:
      Marcelli populus meritum cognoscere posset.

      We may observe that Damasus was made Bishop of Rome, A. D. 366.]


      170 (return) [ Optatus contr. Donatist. l. i. c. 17, 18. * Note:
      The words of Optatus are, Profectus (Roman) causam dixit; jussus
      con reverti Carthaginem; perhaps, in pleading his cause, he
      exculpated himself, since he received an order to return to
      Carthage.—G.]


      171 (return) [ The Acts of the Passion of St. Boniface, which
      abound in miracles and declamation, are published by Ruinart, (p.
      283—291,) both in Greek and Latin, from the authority of very
      ancient manuscripts. Note: We are ignorant whether Aglae and
      Boniface were Christians at the time of their unlawful
      connection. See Tillemont. Mem, Eccles. Note on the Persecution
      of Domitian, tom. v. note 82. M. de Tillemont proves also that
      the history is doubtful.—G. ——Sir D. Dalrymple (Lord Hailes)
      calls the story of Aglae and Boniface as of equal authority with
      our _popular_ histories of Whittington and Hickathrift. Christian
      Antiquities, ii. 64.—M.]


      The sanguinary temper of Galerius, the first and principal author
      of the persecution, was formidable to those Christians whom their
      misfortunes had placed within the limits of his dominions; and it
      may fairly be presumed that many persons of a middle rank, who
      were not confined by the chains either of wealth or of poverty,
      very frequently deserted their native country, and sought a
      refuge in the milder climate of the West. 1711 As long as he
      commanded only the armies and provinces of Illyricum, he could
      with difficulty either find or make a considerable number of
      martyrs, in a warlike country, which had entertained the
      missionaries of the gospel with more coldness and reluctance than
      any other part of the empire. 172 But when Galerius had obtained
      the supreme power, and the government of the East, he indulged in
      their fullest extent his zeal and cruelty, not only in the
      provinces of Thrace and Asia, which acknowledged his immediate
      jurisdiction, but in those of Syria, Palestine, and Egypt, where
      Maximin gratified his own inclination, by yielding a rigorous
      obedience to the stern commands of his benefactor. 173 The
      frequent disappointments of his ambitious views, the experience
      of six years of persecution, and the salutary reflections which a
      lingering and painful distemper suggested to the mind of
      Galerius, at length convinced him that the most violent efforts
      of despotism are insufficient to extirpate a whole people, or to
      subdue their religious prejudices. Desirous of repairing the
      mischief that he had occasioned, he published in his own name,
      and in those of Licinius and Constantine, a general edict, which,
      after a pompous recital of the Imperial titles, proceeded in the
      following manner:—


      1711 (return) [ A little after this, Christianity was propagated
      to the north of the Roman provinces, among the tribes of Germany:
      a multitude of Christians, forced by the persecutions of the
      Emperors to take refuge among the Barbarians, were received with
      kindness. Euseb. de Vit. Constant. ii. 53. Semler Select. cap. H.
      E. p. 115. The Goths owed their first knowledge of Christianity
      to a young girl, a prisoner of war; she continued in the midst of
      them her exercises of piety; she fasted, prayed, and praised God
      day and night. When she was asked what good would come of so much
      painful trouble she answered, “It is thus that Christ, the Son of
      God, is to be honored.” Sozomen, ii. c. 6.—G.]


      172 (return) [ During the four first centuries, there exist few
      traces of either bishops or bishoprics in the western Illyricum.
      It has been thought probable that the primate of Milan extended
      his jurisdiction over Sirmium, the capital of that great
      province. See the Geographia Sacra of Charles de St. Paul, p.
      68-76, with the observations of Lucas Holstenius.]


      173 (return) [ The viiith book of Eusebius, as well as the
      supplement concerning the martyrs of Palestine, principally
      relate to the persecution of Galerius and Maximin. The general
      lamentations with which Lactantius opens the vth book of his
      Divine Institutions allude to their cruelty.] “Among the
      important cares which have occupied our mind for the utility and
      preservation of the empire, it was our intention to correct and
      reestablish all things according to the ancient laws and public
      discipline of the Romans. We were particularly desirous of
      reclaiming into the way of reason and nature, the deluded
      Christians who had renounced the religion and ceremonies
      instituted by their fathers; and presumptuously despising the
      practice of antiquity, had invented extravagant laws and
      opinions, according to the dictates of their fancy, and had
      collected a various society from the different provinces of our
      empire. The edicts, which we have published to enforce the
      worship of the gods, having exposed many of the Christians to
      danger and distress, many having suffered death, and many more,
      who still persist in their impious folly, being left destitute of
      _any_ public exercise of religion, we are disposed to extend to
      those unhappy men the effects of our wonted clemency. We permit
      them therefore freely to profess their private opinions, and to
      assemble in their conventicles without fear or molestation,
      provided always that they preserve a due respect to the
      established laws and government. By another rescript we shall
      signify our intentions to the judges and magistrates; and we hope
      that our indulgence will engage the Christians to offer up their
      prayers to the Deity whom they adore, for our safety and
      prosperity for their own, and for that of the republic.” 174 It
      is not usually in the language of edicts and manifestos that we
      should search for the real character or the secret motives of
      princes; but as these were the words of a dying emperor, his
      situation, perhaps, may be admitted as a pledge of his sincerity.


      174 (return) [ Eusebius (l. viii. c. 17) has given us a Greek
      version, and Lactantius (de M. P. c. 34) the Latin original, of
      this memorable edict. Neither of these writers seems to recollect
      how directly it contradicts whatever they have just affirmed of
      the remorse and repentance of Galerius. Note: But Gibbon has
      answered this by his just observation, that it is not in the
      language of edicts and manifestos that we should search * * for
      the secre motives of princes.—M.]


      When Galerius subscribed this edict of toleration, he was well
      assured that Licinius would readily comply with the inclinations
      of his friend and benefactor, and that any measures in favor of
      the Christians would obtain the approbation of Constantine. But
      the emperor would not venture to insert in the preamble the name
      of Maximin, whose consent was of the greatest importance, and who
      succeeded a few days afterwards to the provinces of Asia. In the
      first six months, however, of his new reign, Maximin affected to
      adopt the prudent counsels of his predecessor; and though he
      never condescended to secure the tranquillity of the church by a
      public edict, Sabinus, his Prætorian præfect, addressed a
      circular letter to all the governors and magistrates of the
      provinces, expatiating on the Imperial clemency, acknowledging
      the invincible obstinacy of the Christians, and directing the
      officers of justice to cease their ineffectual prosecutions, and
      to connive at the secret assemblies of those enthusiasts. In
      consequence of these orders, great numbers of Christians were
      released from prison, or delivered from the mines. The
      confessors, singing hymns of triumph, returned into their own
      countries; and those who had yielded to the violence of the
      tempest, solicited with tears of repentance their readmission
      into the bosom of the church. 175


      175 (return) [ Eusebius, l. ix. c. 1. He inserts the epistle of
      the præfect.]


      But this treacherous calm was of short duration; nor could the
      Christians of the East place any confidence in the character of
      their sovereign. Cruelty and superstition were the ruling
      passions of the soul of Maximin. The former suggested the means,
      the latter pointed out the objects of persecution. The emperor
      was devoted to the worship of the gods, to the study of magic,
      and to the belief of oracles. The prophets or philosophers, whom
      he revered as the favorites of Heaven, were frequently raised to
      the government of provinces, and admitted into his most secret
      councils. They easily convinced him that the Christians had been
      indebted for their victories to their regular discipline, and
      that the weakness of polytheism had principally flowed from a
      want of union and subordination among the ministers of religion.
      A system of government was therefore instituted, which was
      evidently copied from the policy of the church. In all the great
      cities of the empire, the temples were repaired and beautified by
      the order of Maximin, and the officiating priests of the various
      deities were subjected to the authority of a superior pontiff
      destined to oppose the bishop, and to promote the cause of
      paganism. These pontiffs acknowledged, in their turn, the supreme
      jurisdiction of the metropolitans or high priests of the
      province, who acted as the immediate vicegerents of the emperor
      himself. A white robe was the ensign of their dignity; and these
      new prelates were carefully selected from the most noble and
      opulent families. By the influence of the magistrates, and of the
      sacerdotal order, a great number of dutiful addresses were
      obtained, particularly from the cities of Nicomedia, Antioch, and
      Tyre, which artfully represented the well-known intentions of the
      court as the general sense of the people; solicited the emperor
      to consult the laws of justice rather than the dictates of his
      clemency; expressed their abhorrence of the Christians, and
      humbly prayed that those impious sectaries might at least be
      excluded from the limits of their respective territories. The
      answer of Maximin to the address which he obtained from the
      citizens of Tyre is still extant. He praises their zeal and
      devotion in terms of the highest satisfaction, descants on the
      obstinate impiety of the Christians, and betrays, by the
      readiness with which he consents to their banishment, that he
      considered himself as receiving, rather than as conferring, an
      obligation. The priests as well as the magistrates were empowered
      to enforce the execution of his edicts, which were engraved on
      tables of brass; and though it was recommended to them to avoid
      the effusion of blood, the most cruel and ignominious punishments
      were inflicted on the refractory Christians. 176


      176 (return) [ See Eusebius, l. viii. c. 14, l. ix. c. 2—8.
      Lactantius de M. P. c. 36. These writers agree in representing
      the arts of Maximin; but the former relates the execution of
      several martyrs, while the latter expressly affirms, occidi
      servos Dei vetuit. * Note: It is easy to reconcile them; it is
      sufficient to quote the entire text of Lactantius: Nam cum
      clementiam specie tenus profiteretur, occidi servos Dei vetuit,
      debilitari jussit. Itaque confessoribus effodiebantur oculi,
      amputabantur manus, nares vel auriculæ desecabantur. Hæc ille
      moliens Constantini litteris deterretur. Dissimulavit ergo, et
      tamen, si quis inciderit. mari occulte mergebatur. This detail of
      torments inflicted on the Christians easily reconciles Lactantius
      and Eusebius. Those who died in consequence of their tortures,
      those who were plunged into the sea, might well pass for martyrs.
      The mutilation of the words of Lactantius has alone given rise to
      the apparent contradiction.—G. ——Eusebius. ch. vi., relates the
      public martyrdom of the aged bishop of Emesa, with two others,
      who were thrown to the wild beasts, the beheading of Peter,
      bishop of Alexandria, with several others, and the death of
      Lucian, presbyter of Antioch, who was carried to Numidia, and put
      to death in prison. The contradiction is direct and undeniable,
      for although Eusebius may have misplaced the former martyrdoms,
      it may be doubted whether the authority of Maximin extended to
      Nicomedia till after the death of Galerius. The last edict of
      toleration issued by Maximin and published by Eusebius himself,
      Eccl. Hist. ix. 9. confirms the statement of Lactantius.—M.]


      The Asiatic Christians had every thing to dread from the severity
      of a bigoted monarch who prepared his measures of violence with
      such deliberate policy. But a few months had scarcely elapsed
      before the edicts published by the two Western emperors obliged
      Maximin to suspend the prosecution of his designs: the civil war
      which he so rashly undertook against Licinius employed all his
      attention; and the defeat and death of Maximin soon delivered the
      church from the last and most implacable of her enemies. 177


      177 (return) [ A few days before his death, he published a very
      ample edict of toleration, in which he imputes all the severities
      which the Christians suffered to the judges and governors, who
      had misunderstood his intentions.See the edict of Eusebius, l.
      ix. c. 10.]


      In this general view of the persecution, which was first
      authorized by the edicts of Diocletian, I have purposely
      refrained from describing the particular sufferings and deaths of
      the Christian martyrs. It would have been an easy task, from the
      history of Eusebius, from the declamations of Lactantius, and
      from the most ancient acts, to collect a long series of horrid
      and disgustful pictures, and to fill many pages with racks and
      scourges, with iron hooks and red-hot beds, and with all the
      variety of tortures which fire and steel, savage beasts, and more
      savage executioners, could inflict upon the human body. These
      melancholy scenes might be enlivened by a crowd of visions and
      miracles destined either to delay the death, to celebrate the
      triumph, or to discover the relics of those canonized saints who
      suffered for the name of Christ. But I cannot determine what I
      ought to transcribe, till I am satisfied how much I ought to
      believe. The gravest of the ecclesiastical historians, Eusebius
      himself, indirectly confesses, that he has related whatever might
      redound to the glory, and that he has suppressed all that could
      tend to the disgrace, of religion. 178 Such an acknowledgment
      will naturally excite a suspicion that a writer who has so openly
      violated one of the fundamental laws of history, has not paid a
      very strict regard to the observance of the other; and the
      suspicion will derive additional credit from the character of
      Eusebius, 1781 which was less tinctured with credulity, and more
      practised in the arts of courts, than that of almost any of his
      contemporaries. On some particular occasions, when the
      magistrates were exasperated by some personal motives of interest
      or resentment, the rules of prudence, and perhaps of decency, to
      overturn the altars, to pour out imprecations against the
      emperors, or to strike the judge as he sat on his tribunal, it
      may be presumed, that every mode of torture which cruelty could
      invent, or constancy could endure, was exhausted on those devoted
      victims. 179 Two circumstances, however, have been unwarily
      mentioned, which insinuate that the general treatment of the
      Christians, who had been apprehended by the officers of justice,
      was less intolerable than it is usually imagined to have been. 1.
      The confessors who were condemned to work in the mines were
      permitted by the humanity or the negligence of their keepers to
      build chapels, and freely to profess their religion in the midst
      of those dreary habitations. 180 2. The bishops were obliged to
      check and to censure the forward zeal of the Christians, who
      voluntarily threw themselves into the hands of the magistrates.
      Some of these were persons oppressed by poverty and debts, who
      blindly sought to terminate a miserable existence by a glorious
      death. Others were allured by the hope that a short confinement
      would expiate the sins of a whole life; and others again were
      actuated by the less honorable motive of deriving a plentiful
      subsistence, and perhaps a considerable profit, from the alms
      which the charity of the faithful bestowed on the prisoners. 181
      After the church had triumphed over all her enemies, the interest
      as well as vanity of the captives prompted them to magnify the
      merit of their respective sufferings. A convenient distance of
      time or place gave an ample scope to the progress of fiction; and
      the frequent instances which might be alleged of holy martyrs,
      whose wounds had been instantly healed, whose strength had been
      renewed, and whose lost members had miraculously been restored,
      were extremely convenient for the purpose of removing every
      difficulty, and of silencing every objection. The most
      extravagant legends, as they conduced to the honor of the church,
      were applauded by the credulous multitude, countenanced by the
      power of the clergy, and attested by the suspicious evidence of
      ecclesiastical history.


      178 (return) [ Such is the _fair_ deduction from two remarkable
      passages in Eusebius, l. viii. c. 2, and de Martyr. Palestin. c.
      12. The prudence of the historian has exposed his own character
      to censure and suspicion. It was well known that he himself had
      been thrown into prison; and it was suggested that he had
      purchased his deliverance by some dishonorable compliance. The
      reproach was urged in his lifetime, and even in his presence, at
      the council of Tyre. See Tillemont, Mémoires Ecclésiastiques,
      tom. viii. part i. p. 67.]


      1781 (return) [ Historical criticism does not consist in
      rejecting indiscriminately all the facts which do not agree with
      a particular system, as Gibbon does in this chapter, in which,
      except at the last extremity, he will not consent to believe a
      martyrdom. Authorities are to be weighed, not excluded from
      examination. Now, the Pagan historians justify in many places the
      detail which have been transmitted to us by the historians of the
      church, concerning the tortures endured by the Christians. Celsus
      reproaches the Christians with holding their assemblies in
      secret, on account of the fear inspired by their sufferings, “for
      when you are arrested,” he says, “you are dragged to punishment:
      and, before you are put to death, you have to suffer all kinds of
      tortures.” Origen cont. Cels. l. i. ii. vi. viii. passing.
      Libanius, the panegyrist of Julian, says, while speaking of the
      Christians. “Those who followed a corrupt religion were in
      continual apprehensions; they feared lest Julian should invent
      tortures still more refined than those to which they had been
      exposed before, as mutilation, burning alive, &c.; for the
      emperors had inflicted upon them all these barbarities.” Lib.
      Parent in Julian. ap. Fab. Bib. Græc. No. 9, No. 58, p. 283—G.
      ——This sentence of Gibbon has given rise to several learned
      dissertation: Möller, de Fide Eusebii Cæsar, &c., Havniæ, 1813.
      Danzius, de Eusebio Cæs. Hist. Eccl. Scriptore, ejusque tide
      historica recte æstimandâ, &c., Jenæ, 1815. Kestner Commentatio
      de Eusebii Hist. Eccles. conditoris auctoritate et fide, &c. See
      also Reuterdahl, de Fontibus Historiæ Eccles. Eusebianæ, Lond.
      Goth., 1826. Gibbon’s inference may appear stronger than the text
      will warrant, yet it is difficult, after reading the passages, to
      dismiss all suspicion of partiality from the mind.—M.]


      179 (return) [ The ancient, and perhaps authentic, account of the
      sufferings of Tarachus and his companions, (Acta Sincera Ruinart,
      p. 419—448,) is filled with strong expressions of resentment and
      contempt, which could not fail of irritating the magistrate. The
      behavior of Ædesius to Hierocles, præfect of Egypt, was still
      more extraordinary. Euseb. de Martyr. Palestin. c. 5. * Note: M.
      Guizot states, that the acts of Tarachus and his companion
      contain nothing that appears dictated by violent feelings,
      (sentiment outré.) Nothing can be more painful than the constant
      attempt of Gibbon throughout this discussion, to find some flaw
      in the virtue and heroism of the martyrs, some extenuation for
      the cruelty of the persecutors. But truth must not be sacrificed
      even to well-grounded moral indignation. Though the language of
      these martyrs is in great part that of calm de fiance, of noble
      firmness, yet there are many expressions which betray “resentment
      and contempt.” “Children of Satan, worshippers of Devils,” is
      their common appellation of the heathen. One of them calls the
      judge another, one curses, and declares that he will curse the
      Emperors, as pestilential and bloodthirsty tyrants, whom God will
      soon visit in his wrath. On the other hand, though at first they
      speak the milder language of persuasion, the cold barbarity of
      the judges and officers might surely have called forth one
      sentence of abhorrence from Gibbon. On the first unsatisfactory
      answer, “Break his jaw,” is the order of the judge. They direct
      and witness the most excruciating tortures; the people, as M.
      Guizot observers, were so much revolted by the cruelty of Maximus
      that when the martyrs appeared in the amphitheatre, fear seized
      on all hearts, and general murmurs against the unjust judge rank
      through the assembly. It is singular, at least, that Gibbon
      should have quoted “as probably authentic,” acts so much
      embellished with miracle as these of Tarachus are, particularly
      towards the end.—M. * Note: Scarcely were the authorities
      informed of this, than the president of the province, a man, says
      Eusebius, harsh and cruel, banished the confessors, some to
      Cyprus, others to different parts of Palestine, and ordered them
      to be tormented by being set to the most painful labors. Four of
      them, whom he required to abjure their faith and refused, were
      burnt alive. Euseb. de Mart. Palest. c. xiii.—G. Two of these
      were bishops; a fifth, Silvanus, bishop of Gaza, was the last
      martyr; another, named John was blinded, but used to officiate,
      and recite from memory long passages of the sacred writings—M.]


      180 (return) [ Euseb. de Martyr. Palestin. c. 13.]


      181 (return) [ Augustin. Collat. Carthagin. Dei, iii. c. 13, ap.
      Tillanant, Mémoires Ecclésiastiques, tom. v. part i. p. 46. The
      controversy with the Donatists, has reflected some, though
      perhaps a partial, light on the history of the African church.]


      Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
      Constantine.—Part VIII.


      The vague descriptions of exile and imprisonment, of pain and
      torture, are so easily exaggerated or softened by the pencil of
      an artful orator, 1811 that we are naturally induced to inquire
      into a fact of a more distinct and stubborn kind; the number of
      persons who suffered death in consequence of the edicts published
      by Diocletian, his associates, and his successors. The recent
      legendaries record whole armies and cities, which were at once
      swept away by the undistinguishing rage of persecution. The more
      ancient writers content themselves with pouring out a liberal
      effusion of loose and tragical invectives, without condescending
      to ascertain the precise number of those persons who were
      permitted to seal with their blood their belief of the gospel.
      From the history of Eusebius, it may, however, be collected, that
      only nine bishops were punished with death; and we are assured,
      by his particular enumeration of the martyrs of Palestine, 182
      that no more than ninety-two Christians were entitled to that
      honorable appellation. 1821 As we are unacquainted with the
      degree of episcopal zeal and courage which prevailed at that
      time, it is not in our power to draw any useful inferences from
      the former of these facts: but the latter may serve to justify a
      very important and probable conclusion. According to the
      distribution of Roman provinces, Palestine may be considered as
      the sixteenth part of the Eastern empire: 183 and since there
      were some governors, who from a real or affected clemency had
      preserved their hands unstained with the blood of the faithful,
      184 it is reasonable to believe, that the country which had given
      birth to Christianity, produced at least the sixteenth part of
      the martyrs who suffered death within the dominions of Galerius
      and Maximin; the whole might consequently amount to about fifteen
      hundred, a number which, if it is equally divided between the ten
      years of the persecution, will allow an annual consumption of one
      hundred and fifty martyrs. Allotting the same proportion to the
      provinces of Italy, Africa, and perhaps Spain, where, at the end
      of two or three years, the rigor of the penal laws was either
      suspended or abolished, the multitude of Christians in the Roman
      empire, on whom a capital punishment was inflicted by a judicia,
      sentence, will be reduced to somewhat less than two thousand
      persons. Since it cannot be doubted that the Christians were more
      numerous, and their enemies more exasperated, in the time of
      Diocletian, than they had ever been in any former persecution,
      this probable and moderate computation may teach us to estimate
      the number of primitive saints and martyrs who sacrificed their
      lives for the important purpose of introducing Christianity into
      the world.


      1811 (return) [ Perhaps there never was an instance of an author
      committing so deliberately the fault which he reprobates so
      strongly in others. What is the dexterous management of the more
      inartificial historians of Christianity, in exaggerating the
      numbers of the martyrs, compared to the unfair address with which
      Gibbon here quietly dismisses from the account all the horrible
      and excruciating tortures which fell short of death? The reader
      may refer to the xiith chapter (book viii.) of Eusebius for the
      description and for the scenes of these tortures.—M.]


      182 (return) [ Eusebius de Martyr. Palestin. c. 13. He closes his
      narration by assuring us that these were the martyrdoms inflicted
      in Palestine, during the _whole_ course of the persecution. The
      9th chapter of his viiith book, which relates to the province of
      Thebais in Egypt, may seem to contradict our moderate
      computation; but it will only lead us to admire the artful
      management of the historian. Choosing for the scene of the most
      exquisite cruelty the most remote and sequestered country of the
      Roman empire, he relates that in Thebais from ten to one hundred
      persons had frequently suffered martyrdom in the same day. But
      when he proceeds to mention his own journey into Egypt, his
      language insensibly becomes more cautious and moderate. Instead
      of a large, but definite number, he speaks of many Christians,
      and most artfully selects two ambiguous words, which may signify
      either what he had seen, or what he had heard; either the
      expectation, or the execution of the punishment. Having thus
      provided a secure evasion, he commits the equivocal passage to
      his readers and translators; justly conceiving that their piety
      would induce them to prefer the most favorable sense. There was
      perhaps some malice in the remark of Theodorus Metochita, that
      all who, like Eusebius, had been conversant with the Egyptians,
      delighted in an obscure and intricate style. (See Valesius ad
      loc.)]


      1821 (return) [ This calculation is made from the martyrs, of
      whom Eusebius speaks by name; but he recognizes a much greater
      number. Thus the ninth and tenth chapters of his work are
      entitled, “Of Antoninus, Zebinus, Germanus, and other martyrs; of
      Peter the monk. of Asclepius the Maroionite, and other martyrs.”
      [Are these vague contents of chapters very good authority?—M.]
      Speaking of those who suffered under Diocletian, he says, “I will
      only relate the death of one of these, from which, the reader may
      divine what befell the rest.” Hist. Eccl. viii. 6. [This relates
      only to the martyrs in the royal household.—M.] Dodwell had made,
      before Gibbon, this calculation and these objections; but Ruinart
      (Act. Mart. Pref p. 27, _et seq_.) has answered him in a
      peremptory manner: Nobis constat Eusebium in historia infinitos
      passim martyres admisisse. quamvis revera paucorum nomina
      recensuerit. Nec alium Eusebii interpretem quam ipsummet Eusebium
      proferimus, qui (l. iii. c. 33) ait sub Trajano plurimosa ex
      fidelibus martyrii certamen subiisse (l. v. init.) sub Antonino
      et Vero innumerabiles prope martyres per universum orbem
      enituisse affirmat. (L. vi. c. 1.) Severum persecutionem
      concitasse refert, in qua per omnes ubique locorum Ecclesias, ab
      athletis pro pietate certantibus, illustria confecta fuerunt
      martyria. Sic de Decii, sic de Valeriani, persecutionibus
      loquitur, quæ an Dodwelli faveant conjectionibus judicet æquus
      lector. Even in the persecutions which Gibbon has represented as
      much more mild than that of Diocletian, the number of martyrs
      appears much greater than that to which he limits the martyrs of
      the latter: and this number is attested by incontestable
      monuments. I will quote but one example. We find among the
      letters of St. Cyprian one from Lucianus to Celerinus, written
      from the depth of a prison, in which Lucianus names seventeen of
      his brethren dead, some in the quarries, some in the midst of
      tortures some of starvation in prison. Jussi sumus (he proceeds)
      secundum præ ceptum imperatoris, fame et siti necari, et reclusi
      sumus in duabus cellis, ta ut nos afficerent fame et siti et
      ignis vapore.—G.]


      183 (return) [ When Palestine was divided into three, the
      præfecture of the East contained forty-eight provinces. As the
      ancient distinctions of nations were long since abolished, the
      Romans distributed the provinces according to a general
      proportion of their extent and opulence.]


      184 (return) [ Ut gloriari possint nullam se innocentium
      poremisse, nam et ipse audivi aloquos gloriantes, quia
      administratio sua, in hac paris merit incruenta. Lactant.
      Institur. Divin v. 11.]


      We shall conclude this chapter by a melancholy truth, which
      obtrudes itself on the reluctant mind; that even admitting,
      without hesitation or inquiry, all that history has recorded, or
      devotion has feigned, on the subject of martyrdoms, it must still
      be acknowledged, that the Christians, in the course of their
      intestine dissensions, have inflicted far greater severities on
      each other, than they had experienced from the zeal of infidels.
      During the ages of ignorance which followed the subversion of the
      Roman empire in the West, the bishops of the Imperial city
      extended their dominion over the laity as well as clergy of the
      Latin church. The fabric of superstition which they had erected,
      and which might long have defied the feeble efforts of reason,
      was at length assaulted by a crowd of daring fanatics, who from
      the twelfth to the sixteenth century assumed the popular
      character of reformers. The church of Rome defended by violence
      the empire which she had acquired by fraud; a system of peace and
      benevolence was soon disgraced by proscriptions, war, massacres,
      and the institution of the holy office. And as the reformers were
      animated by the love of civil as well as of religious freedom,
      the Catholic princes connected their own interest with that of
      the clergy, and enforced by fire and the sword the terrors of
      spiritual censures. In the Netherlands alone, more than one
      hundred thousand of the subjects of Charles V. are said to have
      suffered by the hand of the executioner; and this extraordinary
      number is attested by Grotius, 185 a man of genius and learning,
      who preserved his moderation amidst the fury of contending sects,
      and who composed the annals of his own age and country, at a time
      when the invention of printing had facilitated the means of
      intelligence, and increased the danger of detection.


      If we are obliged to submit our belief to the authority of
      Grotius, it must be allowed, that the number of Protestants, who
      were executed in a single province and a single reign, far
      exceeded that of the primitive martyrs in the space of three
      centuries, and of the Roman empire. But if the improbability of
      the fact itself should prevail over the weight of evidence; if
      Grotius should be convicted of exaggerating the merit and
      sufferings of the Reformers; 186 we shall be naturally led to
      inquire what confidence can be placed in the doubtful and
      imperfect monuments of ancient credulity; what degree of credit
      can be assigned to a courtly bishop, and a passionate declaimer,
      1861 who, under the protection of Constantine, enjoyed the
      exclusive privilege of recording the persecutions inflicted on
      the Christians by the vanquished rivals or disregarded
      predecessors of their gracious sovereign.


      185 (return) [ Grot. Annal. de Rebus Belgicis, l. i. p. 12, edit.
      fol.]


      186 (return) [ Fra Paola (Istoria del Concilio Tridentino, l.
      iii.) reduces the number of the Belgic martyrs to 50,000. In
      learning and moderation Fra Paola was not inferior to Grotius.
      The priority of time gives some advantage to the evidence of the
      former, which he loses, on the other hand, by the distance of
      Venice from the Netherlands.]


      1861 (return) [ Eusebius and the author of the Treatise de
      Mortibus Persecutorum. It is deeply to be regretted that the
      history of this period rest so much on the loose and, it must be
      admitted, by no means scrupulous authority of Eusebius.
      Ecclesiastical history is a solemn and melancholy lesson that the
      best, even the most sacred, cause will eventually the least
      departure from truth!—M.]


      Chapter XVII: Foundation Of Constantinople.—Part I.

     Foundation Of Constantinople.—Political System Constantine, And
     His Successors.—Military Discipline.—The Palace.—The Finances.

      The unfortunate Licinius was the last rival who opposed the
      greatness, and the last captive who adorned the triumph, of
      Constantine. After a tranquil and prosperous reign, the conquerer
      bequeathed to his family the inheritance of the Roman empire; a
      new capital, a new policy, and a new religion; and the
      innovations which he established have been embraced and
      consecrated by succeeding generations. The age of the great
      Constantine and his sons is filled with important events; but the
      historian must be oppressed by their number and variety, unless
      he diligently separates from each other the scenes which are
      connected only by the order of time. He will describe the
      political institutions that gave strength and stability to the
      empire, before he proceeds to relate the wars and revolutions
      which hastened its decline. He will adopt the division unknown to
      the ancients of civil and ecclesiastical affairs: the victory of
      the Christians, and their intestine discord, will supply copious
      and distinct materials both for edification and for scandal.


      After the defeat and abdication of Licinius, his victorious rival
      proceeded to lay the foundations of a city destined to reign in
      future times, the mistress of the East, and to survive the empire
      and religion of Constantine. The motives, whether of pride or of
      policy, which first induced Diocletian to withdraw himself from
      the ancient seat of government, had acquired additional weight by
      the example of his successors, and the habits of forty years.
      Rome was insensibly confounded with the dependent kingdoms which
      had once acknowledged her supremacy; and the country of the
      Cæsars was viewed with cold indifference by a martial prince,
      born in the neighborhood of the Danube, educated in the courts
      and armies of Asia, and invested with the purple by the legions
      of Britain. The Italians, who had received Constantine as their
      deliverer, submissively obeyed the edicts which he sometimes
      condescended to address to the senate and people of Rome; but
      they were seldom honored with the presence of their new
      sovereign. During the vigor of his age, Constantine, according to
      the various exigencies of peace and war, moved with slow dignity,
      or with active diligence, along the frontiers of his extensive
      dominions; and was always prepared to take the field either
      against a foreign or a domestic enemy. But as he gradually
      reached the summit of prosperity and the decline of life, he
      began to meditate the design of fixing in a more permanent
      station the strength as well as majesty of the throne. In the
      choice of an advantageous situation, he preferred the confines of
      Europe and Asia; to curb with a powerful arm the barbarians who
      dwelt between the Danube and the Tanais; to watch with an eye of
      jealousy the conduct of the Persian monarch, who indignantly
      supported the yoke of an ignominious treaty. With these views,
      Diocletian had selected and embellished the residence of
      Nicomedia: but the memory of Diocletian was justly abhorred by
      the protector of the church: and Constantine was not insensible
      to the ambition of founding a city which might perpetuate the
      glory of his own name. During the late operations of the war
      against Licinius, he had sufficient opportunity to contemplate,
      both as a soldier and as a statesman, the incomparable position
      of Byzantium; and to observe how strongly it was guarded by
      nature against a hostile attack, whilst it was accessible on
      every side to the benefits of commercial intercourse. Many ages
      before Constantine, one of the most judicious historians of
      antiquity1 had described the advantages of a situation, from
      whence a feeble colony of Greeks derived the command of the sea,
      and the honors of a flourishing and independent republic. 2


      1 (return) [ Polybius, l. iv. p. 423, edit. Casaubon. He observes
      that the peace of the Byzantines was frequently disturbed, and
      the extent of their territory contracted, by the inroads of the
      wild Thracians.]


      2 (return) [ The navigator Byzas, who was styled the son of
      Neptune, founded the city 656 years before the Christian æra. His
      followers were drawn from Argos and Megara. Byzantium was
      afterwards rebuild and fortified by the Spartan general
      Pausanias. See Scaliger Animadvers. ad Euseb. p. 81. Ducange,
      Constantinopolis, l. i part i. cap 15, 16. With regard to the
      wars of the Byzantines against Philip, the Gauls, and the kings
      of Bithynia, we should trust none but the ancient writers who
      lived before the greatness of the Imperial city had excited a
      spirit of flattery and fiction.]


      If we survey Byzantium in the extent which it acquired with the
      august name of Constantinople, the figure of the Imperial city
      may be represented under that of an unequal triangle. The obtuse
      point, which advances towards the east and the shores of Asia,
      meets and repels the waves of the Thracian Bosphorus. The
      northern side of the city is bounded by the harbor; and the
      southern is washed by the Propontis, or Sea of Marmara. The basis
      of the triangle is opposed to the west, and terminates the
      continent of Europe. But the admirable form and division of the
      circumjacent land and water cannot, without a more ample
      explanation, be clearly or sufficiently understood. The winding
      channel through which the waters of the Euxine flow with a rapid
      and incessant course towards the Mediterranean, received the
      appellation of Bosphorus, a name not less celebrated in the
      history, than in the fables, of antiquity. 3 A crowd of temples
      and of votive altars, profusely scattered along its steep and
      woody banks, attested the unskilfulness, the terrors, and the
      devotion of the Grecian navigators, who, after the example of the
      Argonauts, explored the dangers of the inhospitable Euxine. On
      these banks tradition long preserved the memory of the palace of
      Phineus, infested by the obscene harpies; 4 and of the sylvan
      reign of Amycus, who defied the son of Leda to the combat of the
      cestus. 5 The straits of the Bosphorus are terminated by the
      Cyanean rocks, which, according to the description of the poets,
      had once floated on the face of the waters; and were destined by
      the gods to protect the entrance of the Euxine against the eye of
      profane curiosity. 6 From the Cyanean rocks to the point and
      harbor of Byzantium, the winding length of the Bosphorus extends
      about sixteen miles, 7 and its most ordinary breadth may be
      computed at about one mile and a half. The new castles of Europe
      and Asia are constructed, on either continent, upon the
      foundations of two celebrated temples, of Serapis and of Jupiter
      Urius. The _old_ castles, a work of the Greek emperors, command
      the narrowest part of the channel in a place where the opposite
      banks advance within five hundred paces of each other. These
      fortresses were destroyed and strengthened by Mahomet the Second,
      when he meditated the siege of Constantinople: 8 but the Turkish
      conqueror was most probably ignorant, that near two thousand
      years before his reign, Darius had chosen the same situation to
      connect the two continents by a bridge of boats. 9 At a small
      distance from the old castles we discover the little town of
      Chrysopolis, or Scutari, which may almost be considered as the
      Asiatic suburb of Constantinople. The Bosphorus, as it begins to
      open into the Propontis, passes between Byzantium and Chalcedon.
      The latter of those cities was built by the Greeks, a few years
      before the former; and the blindness of its founders, who
      overlooked the superior advantages of the opposite coast, has
      been stigmatized by a proverbial expression of contempt. 10


      3 (return) [ The Bosphorus has been very minutely described by
      Dionysius of Byzantium, who lived in the time of Domitian,
      (Hudson, Geograph Minor, tom. iii.,) and by Gilles or Gyllius, a
      French traveller of the XVIth century. Tournefort (Lettre XV.)
      seems to have used his own eyes, and the learning of Gyllius. Add
      Von Hammer, Constantinopolis und der Bosphoros, 8vo.—M.]


      4 (return) [ There are very few conjectures so happy as that of
      Le Clere, (Bibliotehque Universelle, tom. i. p. 148,) who
      supposes that the harpies were only locusts. The Syriac or
      Phœnician name of those insects, their noisy flight, the stench
      and devastation which they occasion, and the north wind which
      drives them into the sea, all contribute to form the striking
      resemblance.]


      5 (return) [ The residence of Amycus was in Asia, between the old
      and the new castles, at a place called Laurus Insana. That of
      Phineus was in Europe, near the village of Mauromole and the
      Black Sea. See Gyllius de Bosph. l. ii. c. 23. Tournefort, Lettre
      XV.]


      6 (return) [ The deception was occasioned by several pointed
      rocks, alternately sovered and abandoned by the waves. At present
      there are two small islands, one towards either shore; that of
      Europe is distinguished by the column of Pompey.]


      7 (return) [ The ancients computed one hundred and twenty stadia,
      or fifteen Roman miles. They measured only from the new castles,
      but they carried the straits as far as the town of Chalcedon.]


      8 (return) [ Ducas. Hist. c. 34. Leunclavius Hist. Turcica
      Mussulmanica, l. xv. p. 577. Under the Greek empire these castles
      were used as state prisons, under the tremendous name of Lethe,
      or towers of oblivion.]


      9 (return) [ Darius engraved in Greek and Assyrian letters, on
      two marble columns, the names of his subject nations, and the
      amazing numbers of his land and sea forces. The Byzantines
      afterwards transported these columns into the city, and used them
      for the altars of their tutelar deities. Herodotus, l. iv. c.
      87.]


      10 (return) [ Namque arctissimo inter Europam Asiamque divortio
      Byzantium in extremâ Europâ posuere Greci, quibus, Pythium
      Apollinem consulentibus ubi conderent urbem, redditum oraculum
      est, quærerent sedem _cæcerum_ terris adversam. Ea ambage
      Chalcedonii monstrabantur quod priores illuc advecti, prævisâ
      locorum utilitate pejora legissent Tacit. Annal. xii. 63.]


      The harbor of Constantinople, which may be considered as an arm
      of the Bosphorus, obtained, in a very remote period, the
      denomination of the _Golden Horn_. The curve which it describes
      might be compared to the horn of a stag, or as it should seem,
      with more propriety, to that of an ox. 11 The epithet of _golden_
      was expressive of the riches which every wind wafted from the
      most distant countries into the secure and capacious port of
      Constantinople. The River Lycus, formed by the conflux of two
      little streams, pours into the harbor a perpetual supply of fresh
      water, which serves to cleanse the bottom, and to invite the
      periodical shoals of fish to seek their retreat in that
      convenient recess. As the vicissitudes of tides are scarcely felt
      in those seas, the constant depth of the harbor allows goods to
      be landed on the quays without the assistance of boats; and it
      has been observed, that in many places the largest vessels may
      rest their prows against the houses, while their sterns are
      floating in the water. 12 From the mouth of the Lycus to that of
      the harbor, this arm of the Bosphorus is more than seven miles in
      length. The entrance is about five hundred yards broad, and a
      strong chain could be occasionally drawn across it, to guard the
      port and city from the attack of a hostile navy. 13


      11 (return) [ Strabo, l. vii. p. 492, [edit. Casaub.] Most of the
      antlers are now broken off; or, to speak less figuratively, most
      of the recesses of the harbor are filled up. See Gill. de
      Bosphoro Thracio, l. i. c. 5.]


      12 (return) [ Procopius de Ædificiis, l. i. c. 5. His description
      is confirmed by modern travellers. See Thevenot, part i. l. i. c.
      15. Tournefort, Lettre XII. Niebuhr, Voyage d’Arabie, p. 22.]


      13 (return) [ See Ducange, C. P. l. i. part i. c. 16, and his
      Observations sur Villehardouin, p. 289. The chain was drawn from
      the Acropolis near the modern Kiosk, to the tower of Galata; and
      was supported at convenient distances by large wooden piles.]


      Between the Bosphorus and the Hellespont, the shores of Europe
      and Asia, receding on either side, enclose the sea of Marmara,
      which was known to the ancients by the denomination of Propontis.
      The navigation from the issue of the Bosphorus to the entrance of
      the Hellespont is about one hundred and twenty miles.


      Those who steer their westward course through the middle of the
      Propontis, may at once descry the high lands of Thrace and
      Bithynia, and never lose sight of the lofty summit of Mount
      Olympus, covered with eternal snows. 14 They leave on the left a
      deep gulf, at the bottom of which Nicomedia was seated, the
      Imperial residence of Diocletian; and they pass the small islands
      of Cyzicus and Proconnesus before they cast anchor at Gallipoli;
      where the sea, which separates Asia from Europe, is again
      contracted into a narrow channel.


      14 (return) [ Thevenot (Voyages au Levant, part i. l. i. c. 14)
      contracts the measure to 125 small Greek miles. Belon
      (Observations, l. ii. c. 1.) gives a good description of the
      Propontis, but contents himself with the vague expression of one
      day and one night’s sail. When Sandy’s (Travels, p. 21) talks of
      150 furlongs in length, as well as breadth we can only suppose
      some mistake of the press in the text of that judicious
      traveller.]


      The geographers who, with the most skilful accuracy, have
      surveyed the form and extent of the Hellespont, assign about
      sixty miles for the winding course, and about three miles for the
      ordinary breadth of those celebrated straits. 15 But the
      narrowest part of the channel is found to the northward of the
      old Turkish castles between the cities of Sestus and Abydus. It
      was here that the adventurous Leander braved the passage of the
      flood for the possession of his mistress. 16 It was here
      likewise, in a place where the distance between the opposite
      banks cannot exceed five hundred paces, that Xerxes imposed a
      stupendous bridge of boats, for the purpose of transporting into
      Europe a hundred and seventy myriads of barbarians. 17 A sea
      contracted within such narrow limits may seem but ill to deserve
      the singular epithet of _broad_, which Homer, as well as Orpheus,
      has frequently bestowed on the Hellespont. 1711 But our ideas of
      greatness are of a relative nature: the traveller, and especially
      the poet, who sailed along the Hellespont, who pursued the
      windings of the stream, and contemplated the rural scenery, which
      appeared on every side to terminate the prospect, insensibly lost
      the remembrance of the sea; and his fancy painted those
      celebrated straits, with all the attributes of a mighty river
      flowing with a swift current, in the midst of a woody and inland
      country, and at length, through a wide mouth, discharging itself
      into the Ægean or Archipelago. 18 Ancient Troy, 19 seated on a an
      eminence at the foot of Mount Ida, overlooked the mouth of the
      Hellespont, which scarcely received an accession of waters from
      the tribute of those immortal rivulets the Simois and Scamander.
      The Grecian camp had stretched twelve miles along the shore from
      the Sigæan to the Rhætean promontory; and the flanks of the army
      were guarded by the bravest chiefs who fought under the banners
      of Agamemnon. The first of those promontories was occupied by
      Achilles with his invincible myrmidons, and the dauntless Ajax
      pitched his tents on the other. After Ajax had fallen a sacrifice
      to his disappointed pride, and to the ingratitude of the Greeks,
      his sepulchre was erected on the ground where he had defended the
      navy against the rage of Jove and of Hector; and the citizens of
      the rising town of Rhæteum celebrated his memory with divine
      honors. 20 Before Constantine gave a just preference to the
      situation of Byzantium, he had conceived the design of erecting
      the seat of empire on this celebrated spot, from whence the
      Romans derived their fabulous origin. The extensive plain which
      lies below ancient Troy, towards the Rhætean promontory and the
      tomb of Ajax, was first chosen for his new capital; and though
      the undertaking was soon relinquished the stately remains of
      unfinished walls and towers attracted the notice of all who
      sailed through the straits of the Hellespont. 21


      15 (return) [ See an admirable dissertation of M. d’Anville upon
      the Hellespont or Dardanelles, in the Mémoires tom. xxviii. p.
      318—346. Yet even that ingenious geographer is too fond of
      supposing new, and perhaps imaginary _measures_, for the purpose
      of rendering ancient writers as accurate as himself. The stadia
      employed by Herodotus in the description of the Euxine, the
      Bosphorus, &c., (l. iv. c. 85,) must undoubtedly be all of the
      same species; but it seems impossible to reconcile them either
      with truth or with each other.]


      16 (return) [ The oblique distance between Sestus and Abydus was
      thirty stadia. The improbable tale of Hero and Leander is exposed
      by M. Mahudel, but is defended on the authority of poets and
      medals by M. de la Nauze. See the Académie des Inscriptions, tom.
      vii. Hist. p. 74. elem. p. 240. Note: The practical illustration
      of the possibility of Leander’s feat by Lord Byron and other
      English swimmers is too well known to need particularly
      reference—M.]


      17 (return) [ See the seventh book of Herodotus, who has erected
      an elegant trophy to his own fame and to that of his country. The
      review appears to have been made with tolerable accuracy; but the
      vanity, first of the Persians, and afterwards of the Greeks, was
      interested to magnify the armament and the victory. I should much
      doubt whether the _invaders_ have ever outnumbered the _men_ of
      any country which they attacked.]


      1711 (return) [ Gibbon does not allow greater width between the
      two nearest points of the shores of the Hellespont than between
      those of the Bosphorus; yet all the ancient writers speak of the
      Hellespontic strait as broader than the other: they agree in
      giving it seven stadia in its narrowest width, (Herod. in Melp.
      c. 85. Polym. c. 34. Strabo, p. 591. Plin. iv. c. 12.) which make
      875 paces. It is singular that Gibbon, who in the fifteenth note
      of this chapter reproaches d’Anville with being fond of supposing
      new and perhaps imaginary measures, has here adopted the peculiar
      measurement which d’Anville has assigned to the stadium. This
      great geographer believes that the ancients had a stadium of
      fifty-one toises, and it is that which he applies to the walls of
      Babylon. Now, seven of these stadia are equal to about 500 paces,
      7 stadia = 2142 feet: 500 paces = 2135 feet 5 inches.—G. See
      Rennell, Geog. of Herod. p. 121. Add Ukert, Geographie der
      Griechen und Romer, v. i. p. 2, 71.—M.]


      18 (return) [ See Wood’s Observations on Homer, p. 320. I have,
      with pleasure, selected this remark from an author who in general
      seems to have disappointed the expectation of the public as a
      critic, and still more as a traveller. He had visited the banks
      of the Hellespont; and had read Strabo; he ought to have
      consulted the Roman itineraries. How was it possible for him to
      confound Ilium and Alexandria Troas, (Observations, p. 340, 341,)
      two cities which were sixteen miles distant from each other? *
      Note: Compare Walpole’s Memoirs on Turkey, v. i. p. 101. Dr.
      Clarke adopted Mr. Walpole’s interpretation of the salt
      Hellespont. But the old interpretation is more graphic and
      Homeric. Clarke’s Travels, ii. 70.—M.]


      19 (return) [ Demetrius of Scepsis wrote sixty books on thirty
      lines of Homer’s catalogue. The XIIIth Book of Strabo is
      sufficient for _our_ curiosity.]


      20 (return) [ Strabo, l. xiii. p. 595, [890, edit. Casaub.] The
      disposition of the ships, which were drawn upon dry land, and the
      posts of Ajax and Achilles, are very clearly described by Homer.
      See Iliad, ix. 220.]


      21 (return) [ Zosim. l. ii. [c. 30,] p. 105. Sozomen, l. ii. c.
      3. Theophanes, p. 18. Nicephorus Callistus, l. vii. p. 48.
      Zonaras, tom. ii. l. xiii. p. 6. Zosimus places the new city
      between Ilium and Alexandria, but this apparent difference may be
      reconciled by the large extent of its circumference. Before the
      foundation of Constantinople, Thessalonica is mentioned by
      Cedrenus, (p. 283,) and Sardica by Zonaras, as the intended
      capital. They both suppose with very little probability, that the
      emperor, if he had not been prevented by a prodigy, would have
      repeated the mistake of the _blind_ Chalcedonians.]


      We are at present qualified to view the advantageous position of
      Constantinople; which appears to have been formed by nature for
      the centre and capital of a great monarchy. Situated in the
      forty-first degree of latitude, the Imperial city commanded, from
      her seven hills, 22 the opposite shores of Europe and Asia; the
      climate was healthy and temperate, the soil fertile, the harbor
      secure and capacious; and the approach on the side of the
      continent was of small extent and easy defence. The Bosphorus and
      the Hellespont may be considered as the two gates of
      Constantinople; and the prince who possessed those important
      passages could always shut them against a naval enemy, and open
      them to the fleets of commerce. The preservation of the eastern
      provinces may, in some degree, be ascribed to the policy of
      Constantine, as the barbarians of the Euxine, who in the
      preceding age had poured their armaments into the heart of the
      Mediterranean, soon desisted from the exercise of piracy, and
      despaired of forcing this insurmountable barrier. When the gates
      of the Hellespont and Bosphorus were shut, the capital still
      enjoyed within their spacious enclosure every production which
      could supply the wants, or gratify the luxury, of its numerous
      inhabitants. The sea-coasts of Thrace and Bithynia, which
      languish under the weight of Turkish oppression, still exhibit a
      rich prospect of vineyards, of gardens, and of plentiful
      harvests; and the Propontis has ever been renowned for an
      inexhaustible store of the most exquisite fish, that are taken in
      their stated seasons, without skill, and almost without labor. 23
      But when the passages of the straits were thrown open for trade,
      they alternately admitted the natural and artificial riches of
      the north and south, of the Euxine, and of the Mediterranean.
      Whatever rude commodities were collected in the forests of
      Germany and Scythia, and far as the sources of the Tanais and the
      Borysthenes; whatsoever was manufactured by the skill of Europe
      or Asia; the corn of Egypt, and the gems and spices of the
      farthest India, were brought by the varying winds into the port
      of Constantinople, which for many ages attracted the commerce of
      the ancient world. 24


      [See Basilica Of Constantinople]


      22 (return) [ Pocock’s Description of the East, vol. ii. part ii.
      p. 127. His plan of the seven hills is clear and accurate. That
      traveller is seldom unsatisfactory.]


      23 (return) [ See Belon, Observations, c. 72—76. Among a variety
      of different species, the Pelamides, a sort of Thunnies, were the
      most celebrated. We may learn from Polybius, Strabo, and Tacitus,
      that the profits of the fishery constituted the principal revenue
      of Byzantium.]


      24 (return) [ See the eloquent description of Busbequius,
      epistol. i. p. 64. Est in Europa; habet in conspectu Asiam,
      Egyptum. Africamque a dextrâ: quæ tametsi contiguæ non sunt,
      maris tamen navigandique commoditate veluti junguntur. A sinistra
      vero Pontus est Euxinus, &c.]


      The prospect of beauty, of safety, and of wealth, united in a
      single spot, was sufficient to justify the choice of Constantine.
      But as some decent mixture of prodigy and fable has, in every
      age, been supposed to reflect a becoming majesty on the origin of
      great cities, 25 the emperor was desirous of ascribing his
      resolution, not so much to the uncertain counsels of human
      policy, as to the infallible and eternal decrees of divine
      wisdom. In one of his laws he has been careful to instruct
      posterity, that in obedience to the commands of God, he laid the
      everlasting foundations of Constantinople: 26 and though he has
      not condescended to relate in what manner the celestial
      inspiration was communicated to his mind, the defect of his
      modest silence has been liberally supplied by the ingenuity of
      succeeding writers; who describe the nocturnal vision which
      appeared to the fancy of Constantine, as he slept within the
      walls of Byzantium. The tutelar genius of the city, a venerable
      matron sinking under the weight of years and infirmities, was
      suddenly transformed into a blooming maid, whom his own hands
      adorned with all the symbols of Imperial greatness. 27 The
      monarch awoke, interpreted the auspicious omen, and obeyed,
      without hesitation, the will of Heaven. The day which gave birth
      to a city or colony was celebrated by the Romans with such
      ceremonies as had been ordained by a generous superstition; 28
      and though Constantine might omit some rites which savored too
      strongly of their Pagan origin, yet he was anxious to leave a
      deep impression of hope and respect on the minds of the
      spectators. On foot, with a lance in his hand, the emperor
      himself led the solemn procession; and directed the line, which
      was traced as the boundary of the destined capital: till the
      growing circumference was observed with astonishment by the
      assistants, who, at length, ventured to observe, that he had
      already exceeded the most ample measure of a great city. “I shall
      still advance,” replied Constantine, “till He, the invisible
      guide who marches before me, thinks proper to stop.” 29 Without
      presuming to investigate the nature or motives of this
      extraordinary conductor, we shall content ourselves with the more
      humble task of describing the extent and limits of
      Constantinople. 30


      25 (return) [ Datur hæc venia antiquitati, ut miscendo humana
      divinis, primordia urbium augustiora faciat. T. Liv. in proœm.]


      26 (return) [ He says in one of his laws, pro commoditate urbis
      quam æterno nomine, jubente Deo, donavimus. Cod. Theodos. l.
      xiii. tit. v. leg. 7.]


      27 (return) [ The Greeks, Theophanes, Cedrenus, and the author of
      the Alexandrian Chronicle, confine themselves to vague and
      general expressions. For a more particular account of the vision,
      we are obliged to have recourse to such Latin writers as William
      of Malmesbury. See Ducange, C. P. l. i. p. 24, 25.]


      28 (return) [ See Plutarch in Romul. tom. i. p. 49, edit. Bryan.
      Among other ceremonies, a large hole, which had been dug for that
      purpose, was filled up with handfuls of earth, which each of the
      settlers brought from the place of his birth, and thus adopted
      his new country.]


      29 (return) [ Philostorgius, l. ii. c. 9. This incident, though
      borrowed from a suspected writer, is characteristic and
      probable.]


      30 (return) [ See in the Mémoires de l’Académie, tom. xxxv p.
      747-758, a dissertation of M. d’Anville on the extent of
      Constantinople. He takes the plan inserted in the Imperium
      Orientale of Banduri as the most complete; but, by a series of
      very nice observations, he reduced the extravagant proportion of
      the scale, and instead of 9500, determines the circumference of
      the city as consisting of about 7800 French _toises_.]


      In the actual state of the city, the palace and gardens of the
      Seraglio occupy the eastern promontory, the first of the seven
      hills, and cover about one hundred and fifty acres of our own
      measure. The seat of Turkish jealousy and despotism is erected on
      the foundations of a Grecian republic; but it may be supposed
      that the Byzantines were tempted by the conveniency of the harbor
      to extend their habitations on that side beyond the modern limits
      of the Seraglio. The new walls of Constantine stretched from the
      port to the Propontis across the enlarged breadth of the
      triangle, at the distance of fifteen stadia from the ancient
      fortification; and with the city of Byzantium they enclosed five
      of the seven hills, which, to the eyes of those who approach
      Constantinople, appear to rise above each other in beautiful
      order. 31 About a century after the death of the founder, the new
      buildings, extending on one side up the harbor, and on the other
      along the Propontis, already covered the narrow ridge of the
      sixth, and the broad summit of the seventh hill. The necessity of
      protecting those suburbs from the incessant inroads of the
      barbarians engaged the younger Theodosius to surround his capital
      with an adequate and permanent enclosure of walls. 32 From the
      eastern promontory to the golden gate, the extreme length of
      Constantinople was about three Roman miles; 33 the circumference
      measured between ten and eleven; and the surface might be
      computed as equal to about two thousand English acres. It is
      impossible to justify the vain and credulous exaggerations of
      modern travellers, who have sometimes stretched the limits of
      Constantinople over the adjacent villages of the European, and
      even of the Asiatic coast. 34 But the suburbs of Pera and Galata,
      though situate beyond the harbor, may deserve to be considered as
      a part of the city; 35 and this addition may perhaps authorize
      the measure of a Byzantine historian, who assigns sixteen Greek
      (about fourteen Roman) miles for the circumference of his native
      city. 36 Such an extent may not seem unworthy of an Imperial
      residence. Yet Constantinople must yield to Babylon and Thebes,
      37 to ancient Rome, to London, and even to Paris. 38


      31 (return) [ Codinus, Antiquitat. Const. p. 12. He assigns the
      church of St. Anthony as the boundary on the side of the harbor.
      It is mentioned in Ducange, l. iv. c. 6; but I have tried,
      without success, to discover the exact place where it was
      situated.]


      32 (return) [ The new wall of Theodosius was constructed in the
      year 413. In 447 it was thrown down by an earthquake, and rebuilt
      in three months by the diligence of the præfect Cyrus. The suburb
      of the Blanchernæ was first taken into the city in the reign of
      Heraclius Ducange, Const. l. i. c. 10, 11.]


      33 (return) [ The measurement is expressed in the Notitia by
      14,075 feet. It is reasonable to suppose that these were Greek
      feet, the proportion of which has been ingeniously determined by
      M. d’Anville. He compares the 180 feet with 78 Hashemite cubits,
      which in different writers are assigned for the heights of St.
      Sophia. Each of these cubits was equal to 27 French inches.]


      34 (return) [ The accurate Thevenot (l. i. c. 15) walked in one
      hour and three quarters round two of the sides of the triangle,
      from the Kiosk of the Seraglio to the seven towers. D’Anville
      examines with care, and receives with confidence, this decisive
      testimony, which gives a circumference of ten or twelve miles.
      The extravagant computation of Tournefort (Lettre XI) of
      thirty-tour or thirty miles, without including Scutari, is a
      strange departure from his usual character.]


      35 (return) [ The sycæ, or fig-trees, formed the thirteenth
      region, and were very much embellished by Justinian. It has since
      borne the names of Pera and Galata. The etymology of the former
      is obvious; that of the latter is unknown. See Ducange, Const. l.
      i. c. 22, and Gyllius de Byzant. l. iv. c. 10.]


      36 (return) [ One hundred and eleven stadia, which may be
      translated into modern Greek miles each of seven stadia, or 660,
      sometimes only 600 French toises. See D’Anville, Mesures
      Itineraires, p. 53.]


      37 (return) [ When the ancient texts, which describe the size of
      Babylon and Thebes, are settled, the exaggerations reduced, and
      the measures ascertained, we find that those famous cities filled
      the great but not incredible circumference of about twenty-five
      or thirty miles. Compare D’Anville, Mém. de l’Académie, tom.
      xxviii. p. 235, with his Description de l’Egypte, p. 201, 202.]


      38 (return) [ If we divide Constantinople and Paris into equal
      squares of 50 French _toises_, the former contains 850, and the
      latter 1160, of those divisions.]


      Chapter XVII: Foundation Of Constantinople.—Part II.


      The master of the Roman world, who aspired to erect an eternal
      monument of the glories of his reign could employ in the
      prosecution of that great work, the wealth, the labor, and all
      that yet remained of the genius of obedient millions. Some
      estimate may be formed of the expense bestowed with Imperial
      liberality on the foundation of Constantinople, by the allowance
      of about two millions five hundred thousand pounds for the
      construction of the walls, the porticos, and the aqueducts. 39
      The forests that overshadowed the shores of the Euxine, and the
      celebrated quarries of white marble in the little island of
      Proconnesus, supplied an inexhaustible stock of materials, ready
      to be conveyed, by the convenience of a short water carriage, to
      the harbor of Byzantium. 40 A multitude of laborers and
      artificers urged the conclusion of the work with incessant toil:
      but the impatience of Constantine soon discovered, that, in the
      decline of the arts, the skill as well as numbers of his
      architects bore a very unequal proportion to the greatness of his
      designs. The magistrates of the most distant provinces were
      therefore directed to institute schools, to appoint professors,
      and by the hopes of rewards and privileges, to engage in the
      study and practice of architecture a sufficient number of
      ingenious youths, who had received a liberal education. 41 The
      buildings of the new city were executed by such artificers as the
      reign of Constantine could afford; but they were decorated by the
      hands of the most celebrated masters of the age of Pericles and
      Alexander. To revive the genius of Phidias and Lysippus,
      surpassed indeed the power of a Roman emperor; but the immortal
      productions which they had bequeathed to posterity were exposed
      without defence to the rapacious vanity of a despot. By his
      commands the cities of Greece and Asia were despoiled of their
      most valuable ornaments. 42 The trophies of memorable wars, the
      objects of religious veneration, the most finished statues of the
      gods and heroes, of the sages and poets, of ancient times,
      contributed to the splendid triumph of Constantinople; and gave
      occasion to the remark of the historian Cedrenus, 43 who
      observes, with some enthusiasm, that nothing seemed wanting
      except the souls of the illustrious men whom these admirable
      monuments were intended to represent. But it is not in the city
      of Constantine, nor in the declining period of an empire, when
      the human mind was depressed by civil and religious slavery, that
      we should seek for the souls of Homer and of Demosthenes.


      39 (return) [ Six hundred centenaries, or sixty thousand pounds’
      weight of gold. This sum is taken from Codinus, Antiquit. Const.
      p. 11; but unless that contemptible author had derived his
      information from some purer sources, he would probably have been
      unacquainted with so obsolete a mode of reckoning.]


      40 (return) [ For the forests of the Black Sea, consult
      Tournefort, Lettre XVI. for the marble quarries of Proconnesus,
      see Strabo, l. xiii. p. 588, (881, edit. Casaub.) The latter had
      already furnished the materials of the stately buildings of
      Cyzicus.]


      41 (return) [ See the Codex Theodos. l. xiii. tit. iv. leg. 1.
      This law is dated in the year 334, and was addressed to the
      præfect of Italy, whose jurisdiction extended over Africa. The
      commentary of Godefroy on the whole title well deserves to be
      consulted.]


      42 (return) [ Constantinopolis dedicatur pœne omnium urbium
      nuditate. Hieronym. Chron. p. 181. See Codinus, p. 8, 9. The
      author of the Antiquitat. Const. l. iii. (apud Banduri Imp.
      Orient. tom. i. p. 41) enumerates Rome, Sicily, Antioch, Athens,
      and a long list of other cities. The provinces of Greece and Asia
      Minor may be supposed to have yielded the richest booty.]


      43 (return) [ Hist. Compend. p. 369. He describes the statue, or
      rather bust, of Homer with a degree of taste which plainly
      indicates that Cadrenus copied the style of a more fortunate
      age.]


      During the siege of Byzantium, the conqueror had pitched his tent
      on the commanding eminence of the second hill. To perpetuate the
      memory of his success, he chose the same advantageous position
      for the principal Forum; 44 which appears to have been of a
      circular, or rather elliptical form. The two opposite entrances
      formed triumphal arches; the porticos, which enclosed it on every
      side, were filled with statues; and the centre of the Forum was
      occupied by a lofty column, of which a mutilated fragment is now
      degraded by the appellation of the _burnt pillar_. This column
      was erected on a pedestal of white marble twenty feet high; and
      was composed of ten pieces of porphyry, each of which measured
      about ten feet in height, and about thirty-three in
      circumference. 45 On the summit of the pillar, above one hundred
      and twenty feet from the ground, stood the colossal statue of
      Apollo. It was a bronze, had been transported either from Athens
      or from a town of Phrygia, and was supposed to be the work of
      Phidias. The artist had represented the god of day, or, as it was
      afterwards interpreted, the emperor Constantine himself, with a
      sceptre in his right hand, the globe of the world in his left,
      and a crown of rays glittering on his head. 46 The Circus, or
      Hippodrome, was a stately building about four hundred paces in
      length, and one hundred in breadth. 47 The space between the two
      _metæ_ or goals were filled with statues and obelisks; and we may
      still remark a very singular fragment of antiquity; the bodies of
      three serpents, twisted into one pillar of brass. Their triple
      heads had once supported the golden tripod which, after the
      defeat of Xerxes, was consecrated in the temple of Delphi by the
      victorious Greeks. 48 The beauty of the Hippodrome has been long
      since defaced by the rude hands of the Turkish conquerors; 4811
      but, under the similar appellation of Atmeidan, it still serves
      as a place of exercise for their horses. From the throne, whence
      the emperor viewed the Circensian games, a winding staircase 49
      descended to the palace; a magnificent edifice, which scarcely
      yielded to the residence of Rome itself, and which, together with
      the dependent courts, gardens, and porticos, covered a
      considerable extent of ground upon the banks of the Propontis
      between the Hippodrome and the church of St. Sophia. 50 We might
      likewise celebrate the baths, which still retained the name of
      Zeuxippus, after they had been enriched, by the munificence of
      Constantine, with lofty columns, various marbles, and above
      threescore statues of bronze. 51 But we should deviate from the
      design of this history, if we attempted minutely to describe the
      different buildings or quarters of the city. It may be sufficient
      to observe, that whatever could adorn the dignity of a great
      capital, or contribute to the benefit or pleasure of its numerous
      inhabitants, was contained within the walls of Constantinople. A
      particular description, composed about a century after its
      foundation, enumerates a capitol or school of learning, a circus,
      two theatres, eight public, and one hundred and fifty-three
      private baths, fifty-two porticos, five granaries, eight
      aqueducts or reservoirs of water, four spacious halls for the
      meetings of the senate or courts of justice, fourteen churches,
      fourteen palaces, and four thousand three hundred and
      eighty-eight houses, which, for their size or beauty, deserved to
      be distinguished from the multitude of plebeian inhabitants. 52


      44 (return) [ Zosim. l. ii. p. 106. Chron. Alexandrin. vel
      Paschal. p. 284, Ducange, Const. l. i. c. 24. Even the last of
      those writers seems to confound the Forum of Constantine with the
      Augusteum, or court of the palace. I am not satisfied whether I
      have properly distinguished what belongs to the one and the
      other.]


      45 (return) [ The most tolerable account of this column is given
      by Pocock. Description of the East, vol. ii. part ii. p. 131. But
      it is still in many instances perplexed and unsatisfactory.]


      46 (return) [ Ducange, Const. l. i. c. 24, p. 76, and his notes
      ad Alexiad. p. 382. The statue of Constantine or Apollo was
      thrown down under the reign of Alexius Comnenus. * Note: On this
      column (says M. von Hammer) Constantine, with singular
      shamelessness, placed his own statue with the attributes of
      Apollo and Christ. He substituted the nails of the Passion for
      the rays of the sun. Such is the direct testimony of the author
      of the Antiquit. Constantinop. apud Banduri. Constantine was
      replaced by the “great and religious” Julian, Julian, by
      Theodosius. A. D. 1412, the key stone was loosened by an
      earthquake. The statue fell in the reign of Alexius Comnenus, and
      was replaced by the cross. The Palladium was said to be buried
      under the pillar. Von Hammer, Constantinopolis und der Bosporos,
      i. 162.—M.]


      47 (return) [ Tournefort (Lettre XII.) computes the Atmeidan at
      four hundred paces. If he means geometrical paces of five feet
      each, it was three hundred _toises_ in length, about forty more
      than the great circus of Rome. See D’Anville, Mesures
      Itineraires, p. 73.]


      48 (return) [ The guardians of the most holy relics would rejoice
      if they were able to produce such a chain of evidence as may be
      alleged on this occasion. See Banduri ad Antiquitat. Const. p.
      668. Gyllius de Byzant. l. ii. c. 13. 1. The original
      consecration of the tripod and pillar in the temple of Delphi may
      be proved from Herodotus and Pausanias. 2. The Pagan Zosimus
      agrees with the three ecclesiastical historians, Eusebius,
      Socrates, and Sozomen, that the sacred ornaments of the temple of
      Delphi were removed to Constantinople by the order of
      Constantine; and among these the serpentine pillar of the
      Hippodrome is particularly mentioned. 3. All the European
      travellers who have visited Constantinople, from Buondelmonte to
      Pocock, describe it in the same place, and almost in the same
      manner; the differences between them are occasioned only by the
      injuries which it has sustained from the Turks. Mahomet the
      Second broke the under jaw of one of the serpents with a stroke
      of his battle axe Thevenot, l. i. c. 17. * Note: See note 75, ch.
      lxviii. for Dr. Clarke’s rejection of Thevenot’s authority. Von
      Hammer, however, repeats the story of Thevenot without
      questioning its authenticity.—M.]


      4811 (return) [ In 1808 the Janizaries revolted against the
      vizier Mustapha Baisactar, who wished to introduce a new system
      of military organization, besieged the quarter of the Hippodrome,
      in which stood the palace of the viziers, and the Hippodrome was
      consumed in the conflagration.—G.]


      49 (return) [ The Latin name _Cochlea_ was adopted by the Greeks,
      and very frequently occurs in the Byzantine history. Ducange,
      Const. i. c. l, p. 104.]


      50 (return) [ There are three topographical points which indicate
      the situation of the palace. 1. The staircase which connected it
      with the Hippodrome or Atmeidan. 2. A small artificial port on
      the Propontis, from whence there was an easy ascent, by a flight
      of marble steps, to the gardens of the palace. 3. The Augusteum
      was a spacious court, one side of which was occupied by the front
      of the palace, and another by the church of St. Sophia.]


      51 (return) [ Zeuxippus was an epithet of Jupiter, and the baths
      were a part of old Byzantium. The difficulty of assigning their
      true situation has not been felt by Ducange. History seems to
      connect them with St. Sophia and the palace; but the original
      plan inserted in Banduri places them on the other side of the
      city, near the harbor. For their beauties, see Chron. Paschal. p.
      285, and Gyllius de Byzant. l. ii. c. 7. Christodorus (see
      Antiquitat. Const. l. vii.) composed inscriptions in verse for
      each of the statues. He was a Theban poet in genius as well as in
      birth:—Bæotum in crasso jurares aëre natum. * Note: Yet, for his
      age, the description of the statues of Hecuba and of Homer are by
      no means without merit. See Antholog. Palat. (edit. Jacobs) i.
      37—M.]


      52 (return) [ See the Notitia. Rome only reckoned 1780 large
      houses, _domus;_ but the word must have had a more dignified
      signification. No _insulæ_ are mentioned at Constantinople. The
      old capital consisted of 42 streets, the new of 322.]


      The populousness of his favored city was the next and most
      serious object of the attention of its founder. In the dark ages
      which succeeded the translation of the empire, the remote and the
      immediate consequences of that memorable event were strangely
      confounded by the vanity of the Greeks and the credulity of the
      Latins. 53 It was asserted, and believed, that all the noble
      families of Rome, the senate, and the equestrian order, with
      their innumerable attendants, had followed their emperor to the
      banks of the Propontis; that a spurious race of strangers and
      plebeians was left to possess the solitude of the ancient
      capital; and that the lands of Italy, long since converted into
      gardens, were at once deprived of cultivation and inhabitants. 54
      In the course of this history, such exaggerations will be reduced
      to their just value: yet, since the growth of Constantinople
      cannot be ascribed to the general increase of mankind and of
      industry, it must be admitted that this artificial colony was
      raised at the expense of the ancient cities of the empire. Many
      opulent senators of Rome, and of the eastern provinces, were
      probably invited by Constantine to adopt for their country the
      fortunate spot, which he had chosen for his own residence. The
      invitations of a master are scarcely to be distinguished from
      commands; and the liberality of the emperor obtained a ready and
      cheerful obedience. He bestowed on his favorites the palaces
      which he had built in the several quarters of the city, assigned
      them lands and pensions for the support of their dignity, 55 and
      alienated the demesnes of Pontus and Asia to grant hereditary
      estates by the easy tenure of maintaining a house in the capital.
      56 But these encouragements and obligations soon became
      superfluous, and were gradually abolished. Wherever the seat of
      government is fixed, a considerable part of the public revenue
      will be expended by the prince himself, by his ministers, by the
      officers of justice, and by the domestics of the palace. The most
      wealthy of the provincials will be attracted by the powerful
      motives of interest and duty, of amusement and curiosity. A third
      and more numerous class of inhabitants will insensibly be formed,
      of servants, of artificers, and of merchants, who derive their
      subsistence from their own labor, and from the wants or luxury of
      the superior ranks. In less than a century, Constantinople
      disputed with Rome itself the preëminence of riches and numbers.
      New piles of buildings, crowded together with too little regard
      to health or convenience, scarcely allowed the intervals of
      narrow streets for the perpetual throng of men, of horses, and of
      carriages. The allotted space of ground was insufficient to
      contain the increasing people; and the additional foundations,
      which, on either side, were advanced into the sea, might alone
      have composed a very considerable city. 57


      53 (return) [ Liutprand, Legatio ad Imp. Nicephornm, p. 153. The
      modern Greeks have strangely disfigured the antiquities of
      Constantinople. We might excuse the errors of the Turkish or
      Arabian writers; but it is somewhat astonishing, that the Greeks,
      who had access to the authentic materials preserved in their own
      language, should prefer fiction to truth, and loose tradition to
      genuine history. In a single page of Codinus we may detect twelve
      unpardonable mistakes; the reconciliation of Severus and Niger,
      the marriage of their son and daughter, the siege of Byzantium by
      the Macedonians, the invasion of the Gauls, which recalled
      Severus to Rome, the _sixty_ years which elapsed from his death
      to the foundation of Constantinople, &c.]


      54 (return) [ Montesquieu, Grandeur et Décadence des Romains, c.
      17.]


      55 (return) [ Themist. Orat. iii. p. 48, edit. Hardouin. Sozomen,
      l. ii. c. 3. Zosim. l. ii. p. 107. Anonym. Valesian. p. 715. If
      we could credit Codinus, (p. 10,) Constantine built houses for
      the senators on the exact model of their Roman palaces, and
      gratified them, as well as himself, with the pleasure of an
      agreeable surprise; but the whole story is full of fictions and
      inconsistencies.]


      56 (return) [ The law by which the younger Theodosius, in the
      year 438, abolished this tenure, may be found among the Novellæ
      of that emperor at the end of the Theodosian Code, tom. vi. nov.
      12. M. de Tillemont (Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iv. p. 371) has
      evidently mistaken the nature of these estates. With a grant from
      the Imperial demesnes, the same condition was accepted as a
      favor, which would justly have been deemed a hardship, if it had
      been imposed upon private property.]


      57 (return) [ The passages of Zosimus, of Eunapius, of Sozomen,
      and of Agathias, which relate to the increase of buildings and
      inhabitants at Constantinople, are collected and connected by
      Gyllius de Byzant. l. i. c. 3. Sidonius Apollinaris (in Panegyr.
      Anthem. 56, p. 279, edit. Sirmond) describes the moles that were
      pushed forwards into the sea, they consisted of the famous
      Puzzolan sand, which hardens in the water.]


      The frequent and regular distributions of wine and oil, of corn
      or bread, of money or provisions, had almost exempted the poorest
      citizens of Rome from the necessity of labor. The magnificence of
      the first Cæsars was in some measure imitated by the founder of
      Constantinople: 58 but his liberality, however it might excite
      the applause of the people, has incurred the censure of
      posterity. A nation of legislators and conquerors might assert
      their claim to the harvests of Africa, which had been purchased
      with their blood; and it was artfully contrived by Augustus,
      that, in the enjoyment of plenty, the Romans should lose the
      memory of freedom. But the prodigality of Constantine could not
      be excused by any consideration either of public or private
      interest; and the annual tribute of corn imposed upon Egypt for
      the benefit of his new capital, was applied to feed a lazy and
      insolent populace, at the expense of the husbandmen of an
      industrious province. 59 5911 Some other regulations of this
      emperor are less liable to blame, but they are less deserving of
      notice. He divided Constantinople into fourteen regions or
      quarters, 60 dignified the public council with the appellation of
      senate, 61 communicated to the citizens the privileges of Italy,
      62 and bestowed on the rising city the title of Colony, the first
      and most favored daughter of ancient Rome. The venerable parent
      still maintained the legal and acknowledged supremacy, which was
      due to her age, her dignity, and to the remembrance of her former
      greatness. 63


      58 (return) [ Sozomen, l. ii. c. 3. Philostorg. l. ii. c. 9.
      Codin. Antiquitat. Const. p. 8. It appears by Socrates, l. ii. c.
      13, that the daily allowance of the city consisted of eight
      myriads of σίτου, which we may either translate, with Valesius,
      by the words modii of corn, or consider us expressive of the
      number of loaves of bread. * Note: At Rome the poorer citizens
      who received these gratuities were inscribed in a register; they
      had only a personal right. Constantine attached the right to the
      houses in his new capital, to engage the lower classes of the
      people to build their houses with expedition. Codex Therodos. l.
      xiv.—G.]


      59 (return) [ See Cod. Theodos. l. xiii. and xiv., and Cod.
      Justinian. Edict. xii. tom. ii. p. 648, edit. Genev. See the
      beautiful complaint of Rome in the poem of Claudian de Bell.
      Gildonico, ver. 46-64.——Cum subiit par Roma mihi, divisaque
      sumsit Æquales aurora togas; Ægyptia rura In partem cessere
      novam.]


      5911 (return) [ This was also at the expense of Rome. The emperor
      ordered that the fleet of Alexandria should transport to
      Constantinople the grain of Egypt which it carried before to
      Rome: this grain supplied Rome during four months of the year.
      Claudian has described with force the famine occasioned by this
      measure:—

     Hæc nobis, hæc ante dabas; nunc pabula tantum Roma precor:
     miserere tuæ; pater optime, gentis: Extremam defende famem. Claud.
     de Bell. Gildon. v. 34.—G.

      It was scarcely this measure. Gildo had cut off the African as
      well as the Egyptian supplies.—M.]


      60 (return) [ The regions of Constantinople are mentioned in the
      code of Justinian, and particularly described in the Notitia of
      the younger Theodosius; but as the four last of them are not
      included within the wall of Constantine, it may be doubted
      whether this division of the city should be referred to the
      founder.]


      61 (return) [ Senatum constituit secundi ordinis; _Claros_
      vocavit. Anonym Valesian. p. 715. The senators of old Rome were
      styled _Clarissimi_. See a curious note of Valesius ad Ammian.
      Marcellin. xxii. 9. From the eleventh epistle of Julian, it
      should seem that the place of senator was considered as a burden,
      rather than as an honor; but the Abbé de la Bleterie (Vie de
      Jovien, tom. ii. p. 371) has shown that this epistle could not
      relate to Constantinople. Might we not read, instead of the
      celebrated name of the obscure but more probable word Bisanthe or
      Rhœdestus, now Rhodosto, was a small maritime city of Thrace. See
      Stephan. Byz. de Urbibus, p. 225, and Cellar. Geograph. tom. i.
      p. 849.]


      62 (return) [ Cod. Theodos. l. xiv. 13. The commentary of
      Godefroy (tom. v. p. 220) is long, but perplexed; nor indeed is
      it easy to ascertain in what the Jus Italicum could consist,
      after the freedom of the city had been communicated to the whole
      empire. * Note: “This right, (the Jus Italicum,) which by most
      writers is referred with out foundation to the personal condition
      of the citizens, properly related to the city as a whole, and
      contained two parts. First, the Roman or quiritarian property in
      the soil, (commercium,) and its capability of mancipation,
      usucaption, and vindication; moreover, as an inseparable
      consequence of this, exemption from land-tax. Then, secondly, a
      free constitution in the Italian form, with Duumvirs,
      Quinquennales. and Ædiles, and especially with Jurisdiction.”
      Savigny, Geschichte des Rom. Rechts i. p. 51—M.]


      63 (return) [ Julian (Orat. i. p. 8) celebrates Constantinople as
      not less superior to all other cities than she was inferior to
      Rome itself. His learned commentator (Spanheim, p. 75, 76)
      justifies this language by several parallel and contemporary
      instances. Zosimus, as well as Socrates and Sozomen, flourished
      after the division of the empire between the two sons of
      Theodosius, which established a perfect _equality_ between the
      old and the new capital.]


      As Constantine urged the progress of the work with the impatience
      of a lover, the walls, the porticos, and the principal edifices
      were completed in a few years, or, according to another account,
      in a few months; 64 but this extraordinary diligence should
      excite the less admiration, since many of the buildings were
      finished in so hasty and imperfect a manner, that under the
      succeeding reign, they were preserved with difficulty from
      impending ruin. 65 But while they displayed the vigor and
      freshness of youth, the founder prepared to celebrate the
      dedication of his city. 66 The games and largesses which crowned
      the pomp of this memorable festival may easily be supposed; but
      there is one circumstance of a more singular and permanent
      nature, which ought not entirely to be overlooked. As often as
      the birthday of the city returned, the statue of Constantine,
      framed by his order, of gilt wood, and bearing in his right hand
      a small image of the genius of the place, was erected on a
      triumphal car. The guards, carrying white tapers, and clothed in
      their richest apparel, accompanied the solemn procession as it
      moved through the Hippodrome. When it was opposite to the throne
      of the reigning emperor, he rose from his seat, and with grateful
      reverence adored the memory of his predecessor. 67 At the
      festival of the dedication, an edict, engraved on a column of
      marble, bestowed the title of Second or New Rome on the city of
      Constantine. 68 But the name of Constantinople 69 has prevailed
      over that honorable epithet; and after the revolution of fourteen
      centuries, still perpetuates the fame of its author. 70


      64 (return) [ Codinus (Antiquitat. p. 8) affirms, that the
      foundations of Constantinople were laid in the year of the world
      5837, (A. D. 329,) on the 26th of September, and that the city
      was dedicated the 11th of May, 5838, (A. D. 330.) He connects
      those dates with several characteristic epochs, but they
      contradict each other; the authority of Codinus is of little
      weight, and the space which he assigns must appear insufficient.
      The term of ten years is given us by Julian, (Orat. i. p. 8;) and
      Spanheim labors to establish the truth of it, (p. 69-75,) by the
      help of two passages from Themistius, (Orat. iv. p. 58,) and of
      Philostorgius, (l. ii. c. 9,) which form a period from the year
      324 to the year 334. Modern critics are divided concerning this
      point of chronology and their different sentiments are very
      accurately described by Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iv.
      p. 619-625.]


      65 (return) [ Themistius. Orat. iii. p. 47. Zosim. l. ii. p. 108.
      Constantine himself, in one of his laws, (Cod. Theod. l. xv. tit.
      i.,) betrays his impatience.]


      66 (return) [ Cedrenus and Zonaras, faithful to the mode of
      superstition which prevailed in their own times, assure us that
      Constantinople was consecrated to the virgin Mother of God.]


      67 (return) [ The earliest and most complete account of this
      extraordinary ceremony may be found in the Alexandrian Chronicle,
      p. 285. Tillemont, and the other friends of Constantine, who are
      offended with the air of Paganism which seems unworthy of a
      Christian prince, had a right to consider it as doubtful, but
      they were not authorized to omit the mention of it.]


      68 (return) [ Sozomen, l. ii. c. 2. Ducange C. P. l. i. c. 6.
      Velut ipsius Romæ filiam, is the expression of Augustin. de
      Civitat. Dei, l. v. c. 25.]


      69 (return) [ Eutropius, l. x. c. 8. Julian. Orat. i. p. 8.
      Ducange C. P. l. i. c. 5. The name of Constantinople is extant on
      the medals of Constantine.]


      70 (return) [ The lively Fontenelle (Dialogues des Morts, xii.)
      affects to deride the vanity of human ambition, and seems to
      triumph in the disappointment of Constantine, whose immortal name
      is now lost in the vulgar appellation of Istambol, a Turkish
      corruption of είς τήν πόλιω. Yet the original name is still
      preserved, 1. By the nations of Europe. 2. By the modern Greeks.
      3. By the Arabs, whose writings are diffused over the wide extent
      of their conquests in Asia and Africa. See D’Herbelot,
      Bibliothèque Orientale, p. 275. 4. By the more learned Turks, and
      by the emperor himself in his public mandates Cantemir’s History
      of the Othman Empire, p. 51.]


      The foundation of a new capital is naturally connected with the
      establishment of a new form of civil and military administration.
      The distinct view of the complicated system of policy, introduced
      by Diocletian, improved by Constantine, and completed by his
      immediate successors, may not only amuse the fancy by the
      singular picture of a great empire, but will tend to illustrate
      the secret and internal causes of its rapid decay. In the pursuit
      of any remarkable institution, we may be frequently led into the
      more early or the more recent times of the Roman history; but the
      proper limits of this inquiry will be included within a period of
      about one hundred and thirty years, from the accession of
      Constantine to the publication of the Theodosian code; 71 from
      which, as well as from the _Notitia_ 7111 of the East and West,
      72 we derive the most copious and authentic information of the
      state of the empire. This variety of objects will suspend, for
      some time, the course of the narrative; but the interruption will
      be censured only by those readers who are insensible to the
      importance of laws and manners, while they peruse, with eager
      curiosity, the transient intrigues of a court, or the accidental
      event of a battle.


      71 (return) [ The Theodosian code was promulgated A. D. 438. See
      the Prolegomena of Godefroy, c. i. p. 185.]


      7111 (return) [ The Notitia Dignitatum Imperii is a description
      of all the offices in the court and the state, of the legions,
      &c. It resembles our court almanacs, (Red Books,) with this
      single difference, that our almanacs name the persons in office,
      the Notitia only the offices. It is of the time of the emperor
      Theodosius II., that is to say, of the fifth century, when the
      empire was divided into the Eastern and Western. It is probable
      that it was not made for the first time, and that descriptions of
      the same kind existed before.—G.]


      72 (return) [ Pancirolus, in his elaborate Commentary, assigns to
      the Notitia a date almost similar to that of the Theodosian Code;
      but his proofs, or rather conjectures, are extremely feeble. I
      should be rather inclined to place this useful work between the
      final division of the empire (A. D. 395) and the successful
      invasion of Gaul by the barbarians, (A. D. 407.) See Histoire des
      Anciens Peuples de l’Europe, tom. vii. p. 40.]


      Chapter XVII: Foundation Of Constantinople.—Part III.


      The manly pride of the Romans, content with substantial power,
      had left to the vanity of the East the forms and ceremonies of
      ostentatious greatness. 73 But when they lost even the semblance
      of those virtues which were derived from their ancient freedom,
      the simplicity of Roman manners was insensibly corrupted by the
      stately affectation of the courts of Asia. The distinctions of
      personal merit and influence, so conspicuous in a republic, so
      feeble and obscure under a monarchy, were abolished by the
      despotism of the emperors; who substituted in their room a severe
      subordination of rank and office from the titled slaves who were
      seated on the steps of the throne, to the meanest instruments of
      arbitrary power. This multitude of abject dependants was
      interested in the support of the actual government from the dread
      of a revolution, which might at once confound their hopes and
      intercept the reward of their services. In this divine hierarchy
      (for such it is frequently styled) every rank was marked with the
      most scrupulous exactness, and its dignity was displayed in a
      variety of trifling and solemn ceremonies, which it was a study
      to learn, and a sacrilege to neglect. 74 The purity of the Latin
      language was debased, by adopting, in the intercourse of pride
      and flattery, a profusion of epithets, which Tully would scarcely
      have understood, and which Augustus would have rejected with
      indignation. The principal officers of the empire were saluted,
      even by the sovereign himself, with the deceitful titles of your
      _Sincerity_, your _Gravity_, your _Excellency_, your _Eminence_,
      your _sublime and wonderful Magnitude_, your _illustrious and
      magnificent Highness_. 75 The codicils or patents of their office
      were curiously emblazoned with such emblems as were best adapted
      to explain its nature and high dignity; the image or portrait of
      the reigning emperors; a triumphal car; the book of mandates
      placed on a table, covered with a rich carpet, and illuminated by
      four tapers; the allegorical figures of the provinces which they
      governed; or the appellations and standards of the troops whom
      they commanded. Some of these official ensigns were really
      exhibited in their hall of audience; others preceded their
      pompous march whenever they appeared in public; and every
      circumstance of their demeanor, their dress, their ornaments, and
      their train, was calculated to inspire a deep reverence for the
      representatives of supreme majesty. By a philosophic observer,
      the system of the Roman government might have been mistaken for a
      splendid theatre, filled with players of every character and
      degree, who repeated the language, and imitated the passions, of
      their original model. 76


      73 (return) [ Scilicet externæ superbiæ sueto, non inerat notitia
      nostri, (perhaps _nostræ;_) apud quos vis Imperii valet, inania
      transmittuntur. Tacit. Annal. xv. 31. The gradation from the
      style of freedom and simplicity, to that of form and servitude,
      may be traced in the Epistles of Cicero, of Pliny, and of
      Symmachus.]


      74 (return) [ The emperor Gratian, after confirming a law of
      precedency published by Valentinian, the father of his
      _Divinity_, thus continues: Siquis igitur indebitum sibi locum
      usurpaverit, nulla se ignoratione defendat; sitque plane
      _sacrilegii_ reus, qui _divina_ præcepta neglexerit. Cod. Theod.
      l. vi. tit. v. leg. 2.]


      75 (return) [ Consult the _Notitia Dignitatum_ at the end of the
      Theodosian code, tom. vi. p. 316. * Note: Constantin, qui
      remplaca le grand Patriciat par une noblesse titree et qui
      changea avec d’autres institutions la nature de la societe
      Latine, est le veritable fondateur de la royaute moderne, dans ce
      quelle conserva de Romain. Chateaubriand, Etud. Histor. Preface,
      i. 151. Manso, (Leben Constantins des Grossen,) p. 153, &c., has
      given a lucid view of the dignities and duties of the officers in
      the Imperial court.—M.]


      76 (return) [ Pancirolus ad Notitiam utriusque Imperii, p. 39.
      But his explanations are obscure, and he does not sufficiently
      distinguish the painted emblems from the effective ensigns of
      office.]


      All the magistrates of sufficient importance to find a place in
      the general state of the empire, were accurately divided into
      three classes. 1. The _Illustrious_. 2. The _Spectabiles_, or
      _Respectable_. And, 3. the _Clarissimi;_ whom we may translate by
      the word _Honorable_. In the times of Roman simplicity, the
      last-mentioned epithet was used only as a vague expression of
      deference, till it became at length the peculiar and appropriated
      title of all who were members of the senate, 77 and consequently
      of all who, from that venerable body, were selected to govern the
      provinces. The vanity of those who, from their rank and office,
      might claim a superior distinction above the rest of the
      senatorial order, was long afterwards indulged with the new
      appellation of _Respectable;_ but the title of _Illustrious_ was
      always reserved to some eminent personages who were obeyed or
      reverenced by the two subordinate classes. It was communicated
      only, I. To the consuls and patricians; II. To the Prætorian
      præfects, with the præfects of Rome and Constantinople; III. To
      the masters-general of the cavalry and the infantry; and IV. To
      the seven ministers of the palace, who exercised their _sacred_
      functions about the person of the emperor. 78 Among those
      illustrious magistrates who were esteemed coordinate with each
      other, the seniority of appointment gave place to the union of
      dignities. 79 By the expedient of honorary codicils, the
      emperors, who were fond of multiplying their favors, might
      sometimes gratify the vanity, though not the ambition, of
      impatient courtiers. 80


      77 (return) [ In the Pandects, which may be referred to the
      reigns of the Antonines, Clarissimus is the ordinary and legal
      title of a senator.]


      78 (return) [ Pancirol. p. 12-17. I have not taken any notice of
      the two inferior ranks, _Prefectissimus_ and _Egregius_, which
      were given to many persons who were not raised to the senatorial
      dignity.]


      79 (return) [ Cod. Theodos. l. vi. tit. vi. The rules of
      precedency are ascertained with the most minute accuracy by the
      emperors, and illustrated with equal prolixity by their learned
      interpreter.]


      80 (return) [ Cod. Theodos. l. vi. tit. xxii.]


      I. As long as the Roman consuls were the first magistrates of a
      free state, they derived their right to power from the choice of
      the people. As long as the emperors condescended to disguise the
      servitude which they imposed, the consuls were still elected by
      the real or apparent suffrage of the senate. From the reign of
      Diocletian, even these vestiges of liberty were abolished, and
      the successful candidates who were invested with the annual
      honors of the consulship, affected to deplore the humiliating
      condition of their predecessors. The Scipios and the Catos had
      been reduced to solicit the votes of plebeians, to pass through
      the tedious and expensive forms of a popular election, and to
      expose their dignity to the shame of a public refusal; while
      their own happier fate had reserved them for an age and
      government in which the rewards of virtue were assigned by the
      unerring wisdom of a gracious sovereign. 81 In the epistles which
      the emperor addressed to the two consuls elect, it was declared,
      that they were created by his sole authority. 82 Their names and
      portraits, engraved on gilt tables of ivory, were dispersed over
      the empire as presents to the provinces, the cities, the
      magistrates, the senate, and the people. 83 Their solemn
      inauguration was performed at the place of the Imperial
      residence; and during a period of one hundred and twenty years,
      Rome was constantly deprived of the presence of her ancient
      magistrates. 84


      81 (return) [ Ausonius (in Gratiarum Actione) basely expatiates
      on this unworthy topic, which is managed by Mamertinus (Panegyr.
      Vet. xi. [x.] 16, 19) with somewhat more freedom and ingenuity.]


      82 (return) [ Cum de Consulibus in annum creandis, solus mecum
      volutarem.... te Consulem et designavi, et declaravi, et priorem
      nuncupavi; are some of the expressions employed by the emperor
      Gratian to his preceptor, the poet Ausonius.]


      83 (return) [ Immanesque... dentes Qui secti ferro in tabulas
      auroque micantes, Inscripti rutilum cœlato Consule nomen Per
      proceres et vulgus eant. —Claud. in ii. Cons. Stilichon. 456.


      Montfaucon has represented some of these tablets or dypticks see
      Supplement à l’Antiquité expliquée, tom. iii. p. 220.]


      84 (return) [

     Consule lætatur post plurima seculo viso Pallanteus apex:
     agnoscunt rostra curules Auditas quondam proavis: desuetaque
     cingit Regius auratis Fora fascibus Ulpia lictor. —Claud. in vi.
     Cons. Honorii, 643.

      From the reign of Carus to the sixth consulship of Honorius,
      there was an interval of one hundred and twenty years, during
      which the emperors were always absent from Rome on the first day
      of January. See the Chronologie de Tillemonte, tom. iii. iv. and
      v.]


      On the morning of the first of January, the consuls assumed the
      ensigns of their dignity. Their dress was a robe of purple,
      embroidered in silk and gold, and sometimes ornamented with
      costly gems. 85 On this solemn occasion they were attended by the
      most eminent officers of the state and army, in the habit of
      senators; and the useless fasces, armed with the once formidable
      axes, were borne before them by the lictors. The procession moved
      from the palace 87 to the Forum or principal square of the city;
      where the consuls ascended their tribunal, and seated themselves
      in the curule chairs, which were framed after the fashion of
      ancient times. They immediately exercised an act of jurisdiction,
      by the manumission of a slave, who was brought before them for
      that purpose; and the ceremony was intended to represent the
      celebrated action of the elder Brutus, the author of liberty and
      of the consulship, when he admitted among his fellow-citizens the
      faithful Vindex, who had revealed the conspiracy of the Tarquins.
      88 The public festival was continued during several days in all
      the principal cities in Rome, from custom; in Constantinople,
      from imitation in Carthage, Antioch, and Alexandria, from the
      love of pleasure, and the superfluity of wealth. 89 In the two
      capitals of the empire the annual games of the theatre, the
      circus, and the amphitheatre, 90 cost four thousand pounds of
      gold, (about) one hundred and sixty thousand pounds sterling: and
      if so heavy an expense surpassed the faculties or the
      inclinations of the magistrates themselves, the sum was supplied
      from the Imperial treasury. 91 As soon as the consuls had
      discharged these customary duties, they were at liberty to retire
      into the shade of private life, and to enjoy, during the
      remainder of the year, the undisturbed contemplation of their own
      greatness. They no longer presided in the national councils; they
      no longer executed the resolutions of peace or war. Their
      abilities (unless they were employed in more effective offices)
      were of little moment; and their names served only as the legal
      date of the year in which they had filled the chair of Marius and
      of Cicero. Yet it was still felt and acknowledged, in the last
      period of Roman servitude, that this empty name might be
      compared, and even preferred, to the possession of substantial
      power. The title of consul was still the most splendid object of
      ambition, the noblest reward of virtue and loyalty. The emperors
      themselves, who disdained the faint shadow of the republic, were
      conscious that they acquired an additional splendor and majesty
      as often as they assumed the annual honors of the consular
      dignity. 92


      85 (return) [ See Claudian in Cons. Prob. et Olybrii, 178, &c.;
      and in iv. Cons. Honorii, 585, &c.; though in the latter it is
      not easy to separate the ornaments of the emperor from those of
      the consul. Ausonius received from the liberality of Gratian a
      _vestis palmata_, or robe of state, in which the figure of the
      emperor Constantius was embroidered. Cernis et armorum proceres
      legumque potentes: Patricios sumunt habitus; et more Gabino
      Discolor incedit legio, positisque parumper Bellorum signis,
      sequitur vexilla Quirini. Lictori cedunt aquilæ, ridetque togatus
      Miles, et in mediis effulget curia castris. —Claud. in iv. Cons.
      Honorii, 5. —_strictaque_ procul radiare _secures_. —In Cons.
      Prob. 229]


      87 (return) [ See Valesius ad Ammian. Marcellin. l. xxii. c. 7.]


      88 (return) [ Auspice mox læto sonuit clamore tribunal; Te fastos
      ineunte quater; solemnia ludit Omina libertas; deductum Vindice
      morem Lex servat, famulusque jugo laxatus herili Ducitur, et
      grato remeat securior ictu. —Claud. in iv Cons. Honorii, 611]


      89 (return) [ Celebrant quidem solemnes istos dies omnes ubique
      urbes quæ sub legibus agunt; et Roma de more, et Constantinopolis
      de imitatione, et Antiochia pro luxu, et discincta Carthago, et
      domus fluminis Alexandria, sed Treviri Principis beneficio.
      Ausonius in Grat. Actione.]


      90 (return) [ Claudian (in Cons. Mall. Theodori, 279-331)
      describes, in a lively and fanciful manner, the various games of
      the circus, the theatre, and the amphitheatre, exhibited by the
      new consul. The sanguinary combats of gladiators had already been
      prohibited.]


      91 (return) [ Procopius in Hist. Arcana, c. 26.]


      92 (return) [ In Consulatu honos sine labore suscipitur.
      (Mamertin. in Panegyr. Vet. xi. [x.] 2.) This exalted idea of the
      consulship is borrowed from an oration (iii. p. 107) pronounced
      by Julian in the servile court of Constantius. See the Abbé de la
      Bleterie, (Mémoires de l’Académie, tom. xxiv. p. 289,) who
      delights to pursue the vestiges of the old constitution, and who
      sometimes finds them in his copious fancy]


      The proudest and most perfect separation which can be found in
      any age or country, between the nobles and the people, is perhaps
      that of the Patricians and the Plebeians, as it was established
      in the first age of the Roman republic. Wealth and honors, the
      offices of the state, and the ceremonies of religion, were almost
      exclusively possessed by the former who, preserving the purity of
      their blood with the most insulting jealousy, 93 held their
      clients in a condition of specious vassalage. But these
      distinctions, so incompatible with the spirit of a free people,
      were removed, after a long struggle, by the persevering efforts
      of the Tribunes. The most active and successful of the Plebeians
      accumulated wealth, aspired to honors, deserved triumphs,
      contracted alliances, and, after some generations, assumed the
      pride of ancient nobility. 94 The Patrician families, on the
      other hand, whose original number was never recruited till the
      end of the commonwealth, either failed in the ordinary course of
      nature, or were extinguished in so many foreign and domestic
      wars, or, through a want of merit or fortune, insensibly mingled
      with the mass of the people. 95 Very few remained who could
      derive their pure and genuine origin from the infancy of the
      city, or even from that of the republic, when Cæsar and Augustus,
      Claudius and Vespasian, created from the body of the senate a
      competent number of new Patrician families, in the hope of
      perpetuating an order, which was still considered as honorable
      and sacred. 96 But these artificial supplies (in which the
      reigning house was always included) were rapidly swept away by
      the rage of tyrants, by frequent revolutions, by the change of
      manners, and by the intermixture of nations. 97 Little more was
      left when Constantine ascended the throne, than a vague and
      imperfect tradition, that the Patricians had once been the first
      of the Romans. To form a body of nobles, whose influence may
      restrain, while it secures the authority of the monarch, would
      have been very inconsistent with the character and policy of
      Constantine; but had he seriously entertained such a design, it
      might have exceeded the measure of his power to ratify, by an
      arbitrary edict, an institution which must expect the sanction of
      time and of opinion. He revived, indeed, the title of Patricians,
      but he revived it as a personal, not as an hereditary
      distinction. They yielded only to the transient superiority of
      the annual consuls; but they enjoyed the pre-eminence over all
      the great officers of state, with the most familiar access to the
      person of the prince. This honorable rank was bestowed on them
      for life; and as they were usually favorites, and ministers who
      had grown old in the Imperial court, the true etymology of the
      word was perverted by ignorance and flattery; and the Patricians
      of Constantine were reverenced as the adopted _Fathers_ of the
      emperor and the republic. 98


      93 (return) [ Intermarriages between the Patricians and Plebeians
      were prohibited by the laws of the XII Tables; and the uniform
      operations of human nature may attest that the custom survived
      the law. See in Livy (iv. 1-6) the pride of family urged by the
      consul, and the rights of mankind asserted by the tribune
      Canuleius.]


      94 (return) [ See the animated picture drawn by Sallust, in the
      Jugurthine war, of the pride of the nobles, and even of the
      virtuous Metellus, who was unable to brook the idea that the
      honor of the consulship should be bestowed on the obscure merit
      of his lieutenant Marius. (c. 64.) Two hundred years before, the
      race of the Metelli themselves were confounded among the
      Plebeians of Rome; and from the etymology of their name of
      _Cæcilius_, there is reason to believe that those haughty nobles
      derived their origin from a sutler.]


      95 (return) [ In the year of Rome 800, very few remained, not
      only of the old Patrician families, but even of those which had
      been created by Cæsar and Augustus. (Tacit. Annal. xi. 25.) The
      family of Scaurus (a branch of the Patrician Æmilii) was degraded
      so low that his father, who exercised the trade of a charcoal
      merchant, left him only teu slaves, and somewhat less than three
      hundred pounds sterling. (Valerius Maximus, l. iv. c. 4, n. 11.
      Aurel. Victor in Scauro.) The family was saved from oblivion by
      the merit of the son.]


      96 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xi. 25. Dion Cassius, l. iii. p. 698.
      The virtues of Agricola, who was created a Patrician by the
      emperor Vespasian, reflected honor on that ancient order; but his
      ancestors had not any claim beyond an Equestrian nobility.]


      97 (return) [ This failure would have been almost impossible if
      it were true, as Casaubon compels Aurelius Victor to affirm (ad
      Sueton, in Cæsar v. 24. See Hist. August p. 203 and Casaubon
      Comment., p. 220) that Vespasian created at once a thousand
      Patrician families. But this extravagant number is too much even
      for the whole Senatorial order. unless we should include all the
      Roman knights who were distinguished by the permission of wearing
      the laticlave.]


      98 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 118; and Godefroy ad Cod.
      Theodos. l. vi. tit. vi.]


      II. The fortunes of the Prætorian præfects were essentially
      different from those of the consuls and Patricians. The latter
      saw their ancient greatness evaporate in a vain title.


      The former, rising by degrees from the most humble condition,
      were invested with the civil and military administration of the
      Roman world. From the reign of Severus to that of Diocletian, the
      guards and the palace, the laws and the finances, the armies and
      the provinces, were intrusted to their superintending care; and,
      like the Viziers of the East, they held with one hand the seal,
      and with the other the standard, of the empire. The ambition of
      the præfects, always formidable, and sometimes fatal to the
      masters whom they served, was supported by the strength of the
      Prætorian bands; but after those haughty troops had been weakened
      by Diocletian, and finally suppressed by Constantine, the
      præfects, who survived their fall, were reduced without
      difficulty to the station of useful and obedient ministers. When
      they were no longer responsible for the safety of the emperor’s
      person, they resigned the jurisdiction which they had hitherto
      claimed and exercised over all the departments of the palace.
      They were deprived by Constantine of all military command, as
      soon as they had ceased to lead into the field, under their
      immediate orders, the flower of the Roman troops; and at length,
      by a singular revolution, the captains of the guards were
      transformed into the civil magistrates of the provinces.
      According to the plan of government instituted by Diocletian, the
      four princes had each their Prætorian præfect; and after the
      monarchy was once more united in the person of Constantine, he
      still continued to create the same number of Four Præfects, and
      intrusted to their care the same provinces which they already
      administered. 1. The præfect of the East stretched his ample
      jurisdiction into the three parts of the globe which were subject
      to the Romans, from the cataracts of the Nile to the banks of the
      Phasis, and from the mountains of Thrace to the frontiers of
      Persia. 2. The important provinces of Pannonia, Dacia, Macedonia,
      and Greece, once acknowledged the authority of the præfect of
      Illyricum. 3. The power of the præfect of Italy was not confined
      to the country from whence he derived his title; it extended over
      the additional territory of Rhætia as far as the banks of the
      Danube, over the dependent islands of the Mediterranean, and over
      that part of the continent of Africa which lies between the
      confines of Cyrene and those of Tingitania. 4. The præfect of the
      Gauls comprehended under that plural denomination the kindred
      provinces of Britain and Spain, and his authority was obeyed from
      the wall of Antoninus to the foot of Mount Atlas. 99


      99 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 109, 110. If we had not
      fortunately possessed this satisfactory account of the division
      of the power and provinces of the Prætorian præfects, we should
      frequently have been perplexed amidst the copious details of the
      Code, and the circumstantial minuteness of the Notitia.]


      After the Prætorian præfects had been dismissed from all military
      command, the civil functions which they were ordained to exercise
      over so many subject nations, were adequate to the ambition and
      abilities of the most consummate ministers. To their wisdom was
      committed the supreme administration of justice and of the
      finances, the two objects which, in a state of peace, comprehend
      almost all the respective duties of the sovereign and of the
      people; of the former, to protect the citizens who are obedient
      to the laws; of the latter, to contribute the share of their
      property which is required for the expenses of the state. The
      coin, the highways, the posts, the granaries, the manufactures,
      whatever could interest the public prosperity, was moderated by
      the authority of the Prætorian præfects. As the immediate
      representatives of the Imperial majesty, they were empowered to
      explain, to enforce, and on some occasions to modify, the general
      edicts by their discretionary proclamations. They watched over
      the conduct of the provincial governors, removed the negligent,
      and inflicted punishments on the guilty. From all the inferior
      jurisdictions, an appeal in every matter of importance, either
      civil or criminal, might be brought before the tribunal of the
      præfect; but _his_ sentence was final and absolute; and the
      emperors themselves refused to admit any complaints against the
      judgment or the integrity of a magistrate whom they honored with
      such unbounded confidence. 100 His appointments were suitable to
      his dignity; 101 and if avarice was his ruling passion, he
      enjoyed frequent opportunities of collecting a rich harvest of
      fees, of presents, and of perquisites. Though the emperors no
      longer dreaded the ambition of their præfects, they were
      attentive to counterbalance the power of this great office by the
      uncertainty and shortness of its duration. 102


      100 (return) [ See a law of Constantine himself. A præfectis
      autem prætorio provocare, non sinimus. Cod. Justinian. l. vii.
      tit. lxii. leg. 19. Charisius, a lawyer of the time of
      Constantine, (Heinec. Hist. Romani, p. 349,) who admits this law
      as a fundamental principle of jurisprudence, compares the
      Prætorian præfects to the masters of the horse of the ancient
      dictators. Pandect. l. i. tit. xi.]


      101 (return) [ When Justinian, in the exhausted condition of the
      empire, instituted a Prætorian præfect for Africa, he allowed him
      a salary of one hundred pounds of gold. Cod. Justinian. l. i.
      tit. xxvii. leg. i.]


      102 (return) [ For this, and the other dignities of the empire,
      it may be sufficient to refer to the ample commentaries of
      Pancirolus and Godefroy, who have diligently collected and
      accurately digested in their proper order all the legal and
      historical materials. From those authors, Dr. Howell (History of
      the World, vol. ii. p. 24-77) has deduced a very distinct
      abridgment of the state of the Roman empire]


      From their superior importance and dignity, Rome and
      Constantinople were alone excepted from the jurisdiction of the
      Prætorian præfects. The immense size of the city, and the
      experience of the tardy, ineffectual operation of the laws, had
      furnished the policy of Augustus with a specious pretence for
      introducing a new magistrate, who alone could restrain a servile
      and turbulent populace by the strong arm of arbitrary power. 103
      Valerius Messalla was appointed the first præfect of Rome, that
      his reputation might countenance so invidious a measure; but, at
      the end of a few days, that accomplished citizen 104 resigned his
      office, declaring, with a spirit worthy of the friend of Brutus,
      that he found himself incapable of exercising a power
      incompatible with public freedom. 105 As the sense of liberty
      became less exquisite, the advantages of order were more clearly
      understood; and the præfect, who seemed to have been designed as
      a terror only to slaves and vagrants, was permitted to extend his
      civil and criminal jurisdiction over the equestrian and noble
      families of Rome. The prætors, annually created as the judges of
      law and equity, could not long dispute the possession of the
      Forum with a vigorous and permanent magistrate, who was usually
      admitted into the confidence of the prince. Their courts were
      deserted, their number, which had once fluctuated between twelve
      and eighteen, 106 was gradually reduced to two or three, and
      their important functions were confined to the expensive
      obligation 107 of exhibiting games for the amusement of the
      people. After the office of the Roman consuls had been changed
      into a vain pageant, which was rarely displayed in the capital,
      the præfects assumed their vacant place in the senate, and were
      soon acknowledged as the ordinary presidents of that venerable
      assembly. They received appeals from the distance of one hundred
      miles; and it was allowed as a principle of jurisprudence, that
      all municipal authority was derived from them alone. 108 In the
      discharge of his laborious employment, the governor of Rome was
      assisted by fifteen officers, some of whom had been originally
      his equals, or even his superiors. The principal departments were
      relative to the command of a numerous watch, established as a
      safeguard against fires, robberies, and nocturnal disorders; the
      custody and distribution of the public allowance of corn and
      provisions; the care of the port, of the aqueducts, of the common
      sewers, and of the navigation and bed of the Tyber; the
      inspection of the markets, the theatres, and of the private as
      well as the public works. Their vigilance insured the three
      principal objects of a regular police, safety, plenty, and
      cleanliness; and as a proof of the attention of government to
      preserve the splendor and ornaments of the capital, a particular
      inspector was appointed for the statues; the guardian, as it
      were, of that inanimate people, which, according to the
      extravagant computation of an old writer, was scarcely inferior
      in number to the living inhabitants of Rome. About thirty years
      after the foundation of Constantinople, a similar magistrate was
      created in that rising metropolis, for the same uses and with the
      same powers. A perfect equality was established between the
      dignity of the _two_ municipal, and that of the _four_ Prætorian
      præfects. 109


      103 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. vi. 11. Euseb. in Chron. p. 155.
      Dion Cassius, in the oration of Mæcenas, (l. lvii. p. 675,)
      describes the prerogatives of the præfect of the city as they
      were established in his own time.]


      104 (return) [ The fame of Messalla has been scarcely equal to
      his merit. In the earliest youth he was recommended by Cicero to
      the friendship of Brutus. He followed the standard of the
      republic till it was broken in the fields of Philippi; he then
      accepted and deserved the favor of the most moderate of the
      conquerors; and uniformly asserted his freedom and dignity in the
      court of Augustus. The triumph of Messalla was justified by the
      conquest of Aquitain. As an orator, he disputed the palm of
      eloquence with Cicero himself. Messalla cultivated every muse,
      and was the patron of every man of genius. He spent his evenings
      in philosophic conversation with Horace; assumed his place at
      table between Delia and Tibullus; and amused his leisure by
      encouraging the poetical talents of young Ovid.]


      105 (return) [ Incivilem esse potestatem contestans, says the
      translator of Eusebius. Tacitus expresses the same idea in other
      words; quasi nescius exercendi.]


      106 (return) [ See Lipsius, Excursus D. ad 1 lib. Tacit. Annal.]


      107 (return) [ Heineccii. Element. Juris Civilis secund ordinem
      Pandect i. p. 70. See, likewise, Spanheim de Usu. Numismatum,
      tom. ii. dissertat. x. p. 119. In the year 450, Marcian published
      a law, that _three_ citizens should be annually created Prætors
      of Constantinople by the choice of the senate, but with their own
      consent. Cod. Justinian. li. i. tit. xxxix. leg. 2.]


      108 (return) [ Quidquid igitur intra urbem admittitur, ad P. U.
      videtur pertinere; sed et siquid intra contesimum milliarium.
      Ulpian in Pandect l. i. tit. xiii. n. 1. He proceeds to enumerate
      the various offices of the præfect, who, in the code of
      Justinian, (l. i. tit. xxxix. leg. 3,) is declared to precede and
      command all city magistrates sine injuria ac detrimento honoris
      alieni.]


      109 (return) [ Besides our usual guides, we may observe that
      Felix Cantelorius has written a separate treatise, De Præfecto
      Urbis; and that many curious details concerning the police of
      Rome and Constantinople are contained in the fourteenth book of
      the Theodosian Code.]


      Chapter XVII: Foundation Of Constantinople.—Part IV.


      Those who, in the imperial hierarchy, were distinguished by the
      title of _Respectable_, formed an intermediate class between the
      _illustrious_ præfects, and the _honorable_ magistrates of the
      provinces. In this class the proconsuls of Asia, Achaia, and
      Africa, claimed a preëminence, which was yielded to the
      remembrance of their ancient dignity; and the appeal from their
      tribunal to that of the præfects was almost the only mark of
      their dependence. 110 But the civil government of the empire was
      distributed into thirteen great Dioceses, each of which equalled
      the just measure of a powerful kingdom. The first of these
      dioceses was subject to the jurisdiction of the _count_ of the
      east; and we may convey some idea of the importance and variety
      of his functions, by observing, that six hundred apparitors, who
      would be styled at present either secretaries, or clerks, or
      ushers, or messengers, were employed in his immediate office. 111
      The place of _Augustal præfect_ of Egypt was no longer filled by
      a Roman knight; but the name was retained; and the extraordinary
      powers which the situation of the country, and the temper of the
      inhabitants, had once made indispensable, were still continued to
      the governor. The eleven remaining dioceses, of Asiana, Pontica,
      and Thrace; of Macedonia, Dacia, and Pannonia, or Western
      Illyricum; of Italy and Africa; of Gaul, Spain, and Britain; were
      governed by twelve _vicars_ or _vice-præfects_, 112 whose name
      sufficiently explains the nature and dependence of their office.
      It may be added, that the lieutenant-generals of the Roman
      armies, the military counts and dukes, who will be hereafter
      mentioned, were allowed the rank and title of _Respectable_.


      110 (return) [ Eunapius affirms, that the proconsul of Asia was
      independent of the præfect; which must, however, be understood
      with some allowance. the jurisdiction of the vice-præfect he most
      assuredly disclaimed. Pancirolus, p. 161.]


      111 (return) [ The proconsul of Africa had four hundred
      apparitors; and they all received large salaries, either from the
      treasury or the province See Pancirol. p. 26, and Cod. Justinian.
      l. xii. tit. lvi. lvii.]


      112 (return) [ In Italy there was likewise the _Vicar of Rome_.
      It has been much disputed whether his jurisdiction measured one
      hundred miles from the city, or whether it stretched over the ten
      thousand provinces of Italy.]


      As the spirit of jealousy and ostentation prevailed in the
      councils of the emperors, they proceeded with anxious diligence
      to divide the substance and to multiply the titles of power. The
      vast countries which the Roman conquerors had united under the
      same simple form of administration, were imperceptibly crumbled
      into minute fragments; till at length the whole empire was
      distributed into one hundred and sixteen provinces, each of which
      supported an expensive and splendid establishment. Of these,
      three were governed by _proconsuls_, thirty-seven by _consulars_,
      five by _correctors_, and seventy-one by _presidents_. The
      appellations of these magistrates were different; they ranked in
      successive order, and the ensigns of and their situation, from
      accidental circumstances, might be more or less agreeable or
      advantageous. But they were all (excepting only the pro-consuls)
      alike included in the class of _honorable_ persons; and they were
      alike intrusted, during the pleasure of the prince, and under the
      authority of the præfects or their deputies, with the
      administration of justice and the finances in their respective
      districts. The ponderous volumes of the Codes and Pandects 113
      would furnish ample materials for a minute inquiry into the
      system of provincial government, as in the space of six centuries
      it was approved by the wisdom of the Roman statesmen and lawyers.


      It may be sufficient for the historian to select two singular and
      salutary provisions, intended to restrain the abuse of authority.


      1. For the preservation of peace and order, the governors of the
      provinces were armed with the sword of justice. They inflicted
      corporal punishments, and they exercised, in capital offences,
      the power of life and death. But they were not authorized to
      indulge the condemned criminal with the choice of his own
      execution, or to pronounce a sentence of the mildest and most
      honorable kind of exile. These prerogatives were reserved to the
      præfects, who alone could impose the heavy fine of fifty pounds
      of gold: their vicegerents were confined to the trifling weight
      of a few ounces. 114 This distinction, which seems to grant the
      larger, while it denies the smaller degree of authority, was
      founded on a very rational motive. The smaller degree was
      infinitely more liable to abuse. The passions of a provincial
      magistrate might frequently provoke him into acts of oppression,
      which affected only the freedom or the fortunes of the subject;
      though, from a principle of prudence, perhaps of humanity, he
      might still be terrified by the guilt of innocent blood. It may
      likewise be considered, that exile, considerable fines, or the
      choice of an easy death, relate more particularly to the rich and
      the noble; and the persons the most exposed to the avarice or
      resentment of a provincial magistrate, were thus removed from his
      obscure persecution to the more august and impartial tribunal of
      the Prætorian præfect. 2. As it was reasonably apprehended that
      the integrity of the judge might be biased, if his interest was
      concerned, or his affections were engaged, the strictest
      regulations were established, to exclude any person, without the
      special dispensation of the emperor, from the government of the
      province where he was born; 115 and to prohibit the governor or
      his son from contracting marriage with a native, or an
      inhabitant; 116 or from purchasing slaves, lands, or houses,
      within the extent of his jurisdiction. 117 Notwithstanding these
      rigorous precautions, the emperor Constantine, after a reign of
      twenty-five years, still deplores the venal and oppressive
      administration of justice, and expresses the warmest indignation
      that the audience of the judge, his despatch of business, his
      seasonable delays, and his final sentence, were publicly sold,
      either by himself or by the officers of his court. The
      continuance, and perhaps the impunity, of these crimes, is
      attested by the repetition of impotent laws and ineffectual
      menaces. 118


      113 (return) [ Among the works of the celebrated Ulpian, there
      was one in ten books, concerning the office of a proconsul, whose
      duties in the most essential articles were the same as those of
      an ordinary governor of a province.]


      114 (return) [ The presidents, or consulars, could impose only
      two ounces; the vice-præfects, three; the proconsuls, count of
      the east, and præfect of Egypt, six. See Heineccii Jur. Civil.
      tom. i. p. 75. Pandect. l. xlviii. tit. xix. n. 8. Cod.
      Justinian. l. i. tit. liv. leg. 4, 6.]


      115 (return) [ Ut nulli patriæ suæ administratio sine speciali
      principis permissu permittatur. Cod. Justinian. l. i. tit. xli.
      This law was first enacted by the emperor Marcus, after the
      rebellion of Cassius. (Dion. l. lxxi.) The same regulation is
      observed in China, with equal strictness, and with equal effect.]


      116 (return) [ Pandect. l. xxiii. tit. ii. n. 38, 57, 63.]


      117 (return) [ In jure continetur, ne quis in administratione
      constitutus aliquid compararet. Cod. Theod. l. viii. tit. xv.
      leg. l. This maxim of common law was enforced by a series of
      edicts (see the remainder of the title) from Constantine to
      Justin. From this prohibition, which is extended to the meanest
      officers of the governor, they except only clothes and
      provisions. The purchase within five years may be recovered;
      after which on information, it devolves to the treasury.]


      118 (return) [ Cessent rapaces jam nunc officialium manus;
      cessent, inquam nam si moniti non cessaverint, gladiis
      præcidentur, &c. Cod. Theod. l. i. tit. vii. leg. l. Zeno enacted
      that all governors should remain in the province, to answer any
      accusations, fifty days after the expiration of their power. Cod
      Justinian. l. ii. tit. xlix. leg. l.]


      All the civil magistrates were drawn from the profession of the
      law. The celebrated Institutes of Justinian are addressed to the
      youth of his dominions, who had devoted themselves to the study
      of Roman jurisprudence; and the sovereign condescends to animate
      their diligence, by the assurance that their skill and ability
      would in time be rewarded by an adequate share in the government
      of the republic. 119 The rudiments of this lucrative science were
      taught in all the considerable cities of the east and west; but
      the most famous school was that of Berytus, 120 on the coast of
      Phœnicia; which flourished above three centuries from the time of
      Alexander Severus, the author perhaps of an institution so
      advantageous to his native country. After a regular course of
      education, which lasted five years, the students dispersed
      themselves through the provinces, in search of fortune and
      honors; nor could they want an inexhaustible supply of business
      in a great empire already corrupted by the multiplicity of laws,
      of arts, and of vices. The court of the Prætorian præfect of the
      east could alone furnish employment for one hundred and fifty
      advocates, sixty-four of whom were distinguished by peculiar
      privileges, and two were annually chosen, with a salary of sixty
      pounds of gold, to defend the causes of the treasury. The first
      experiment was made of their judicial talents, by appointing them
      to act occasionally as assessors to the magistrates; from thence
      they were often raised to preside in the tribunals before which
      they had pleaded. They obtained the government of a province;
      and, by the aid of merit, of reputation, or of favor, they
      ascended, by successive steps, to the _illustrious_ dignities of
      the state. 121 In the practice of the bar, these men had
      considered reason as the instrument of dispute; they interpreted
      the laws according to the dictates of private interest and the
      same pernicious habits might still adhere to their characters in
      the public administration of the state. The honor of a liberal
      profession has indeed been vindicated by ancient and modern
      advocates, who have filled the most important stations, with pure
      integrity and consummate wisdom: but in the decline of Roman
      jurisprudence, the ordinary promotion of lawyers was pregnant
      with mischief and disgrace. The noble art, which had once been
      preserved as the sacred inheritance of the patricians, was fallen
      into the hands of freedmen and plebeians, 122 who, with cunning
      rather than with skill, exercised a sordid and pernicious trade.
      Some of them procured admittance into families for the purpose of
      fomenting differences, of encouraging suits, and of preparing a
      harvest of gain for themselves or their brethren. Others, recluse
      in their chambers, maintained the dignity of legal professors, by
      furnishing a rich client with subtleties to confound the plainest
      truths, and with arguments to color the most unjustifiable
      pretensions. The splendid and popular class was composed of the
      advocates, who filled the Forum with the sound of their turgid
      and loquacious rhetoric. Careless of fame and of justice, they
      are described, for the most part, as ignorant and rapacious
      guides, who conducted their clients through a maze of expense, of
      delay, and of disappointment; from whence, after a tedious series
      of years, they were at length dismissed, when their patience and
      fortune were almost exhausted. 123


      119 (return) [ Summâ igitur ope, et alacri studio has leges
      nostras accipite; et vosmetipsos sic eruditos ostendite, ut spes
      vos pulcherrima foveat; toto legitimo opere perfecto, posse etiam
      nostram rempublicam in par tibus ejus vobis credendis gubernari.
      Justinian in proem. Institutionum.]


      120 (return) [ The splendor of the school of Berytus, which
      preserved in the east the language and jurisprudence of the
      Romans, may be computed to have lasted from the third to the
      middle of the sixth century Heinecc. Jur. Rom. Hist. p. 351-356.]


      121 (return) [ As in a former period I have traced the civil and
      military promotion of Pertinax, I shall here insert the civil
      honors of Mallius Theodorus. 1. He was distinguished by his
      eloquence, while he pleaded as an advocate in the court of the
      Prætorian præfect. 2. He governed one of the provinces of Africa,
      either as president or consular, and deserved, by his
      administration, the honor of a brass statue. 3. He was appointed
      vicar, or vice-præfect, of Macedonia. 4. Quæstor. 5. Count of the
      sacred largesses. 6. Prætorian præfect of the Gauls; whilst he
      might yet be represented as a young man. 7. After a retreat,
      perhaps a disgrace of many years, which Mallius (confounded by
      some critics with the poet Manilius; see Fabricius Bibliothec.
      Latin. Edit. Ernest. tom. i.c. 18, p. 501) employed in the study
      of the Grecian philosophy he was named Prætorian præfect of
      Italy, in the year 397. 8. While he still exercised that great
      office, he was created, it the year 399, consul for the West; and
      his name, on account of the infamy of his colleague, the eunuch
      Eutropius, often stands alone in the Fasti. 9. In the year 408,
      Mallius was appointed a second time Prætorian præfect of Italy.
      Even in the venal panegyric of Claudian, we may discover the
      merit of Mallius Theodorus, who, by a rare felicity, was the
      intimate friend, both of Symmachus and of St. Augustin. See
      Tillemont, Hist. des Emp. tom. v. p. 1110-1114.]


      122 (return) [ Mamertinus in Panegyr. Vet. xi. [x.] 20. Asterius
      apud Photium, p. 1500.]


      123 (return) [ The curious passage of Ammianus, (l. xxx. c. 4,)
      in which he paints the manners of contemporary lawyers, affords a
      strange mixture of sound sense, false rhetoric, and extravagant
      satire. Godefroy (Prolegom. ad. Cod. Theod. c. i. p. 185)
      supports the historian by similar complaints and authentic facts.
      In the fourth century, many camels might have been laden with
      law-books. Eunapius in Vit. Ædesii, p. 72.]


      III. In the system of policy introduced by Augustus, the
      governors, those at least of the Imperial provinces, were
      invested with the full powers of the sovereign himself. Ministers
      of peace and war, the distribution of rewards and punishments
      depended on them alone, and they successively appeared on their
      tribunal in the robes of civil magistracy, and in complete armor
      at the head of the Roman legions. 124 The influence of the
      revenue, the authority of law, and the command of a military
      force, concurred to render their power supreme and absolute; and
      whenever they were tempted to violate their allegiance, the loyal
      province which they involved in their rebellion was scarcely
      sensible of any change in its political state. From the time of
      Commodus to the reign of Constantine, near one hundred governors
      might be enumerated, who, with various success, erected the
      standard of revolt; and though the innocent were too often
      sacrificed, the guilty might be sometimes prevented, by the
      suspicious cruelty of their master. 125 To secure his throne and
      the public tranquillity from these formidable servants,
      Constantine resolved to divide the military from the civil
      administration, and to establish, as a permanent and professional
      distinction, a practice which had been adopted only as an
      occasional expedient. The supreme jurisdiction exercised by the
      Prætorian præfects over the armies of the empire, was transferred
      to the two _masters-general_ whom he instituted, the one for the
      _cavalry_, the other for the _infantry;_ and though each of these
      _illustrious_ officers was more peculiarly responsible for the
      discipline of those troops which were under his immediate
      inspection, they both indifferently commanded in the field the
      several bodies, whether of horse or foot, which were united in
      the same army. 126 Their number was soon doubled by the division
      of the east and west; and as separate generals of the same rank
      and title were appointed on the four important frontiers of the
      Rhine, of the Upper and the Lower Danube, and of the Euphrates,
      the defence of the Roman empire was at length committed to eight
      masters-general of the cavalry and infantry. Under their orders,
      thirty-five military commanders were stationed in the provinces:
      three in Britain, six in Gaul, one in Spain, one in Italy, five
      on the Upper, and four on the Lower Danube; in Asia, eight, three
      in Egypt, and four in Africa. The titles of _counts_, and
      _dukes_, 127 by which they were properly distinguished, have
      obtained in modern languages so very different a sense, that the
      use of them may occasion some surprise. But it should be
      recollected, that the second of those appellations is only a
      corruption of the Latin word, which was indiscriminately applied
      to any military chief. All these provincial generals were
      therefore _dukes;_ but no more than ten among them were dignified
      with the rank of _counts_ or companions, a title of honor, or
      rather of favor, which had been recently invented in the court of
      Constantine. A gold belt was the ensign which distinguished the
      office of the counts and dukes; and besides their pay, they
      received a liberal allowance sufficient to maintain one hundred
      and ninety servants, and one hundred and fifty-eight horses. They
      were strictly prohibited from interfering in any matter which
      related to the administration of justice or the revenue; but the
      command which they exercised over the troops of their department,
      was independent of the authority of the magistrates. About the
      same time that Constantine gave a legal sanction to the
      ecclesiastical order, he instituted in the Roman empire the nice
      balance of the civil and the military powers. The emulation, and
      sometimes the discord, which reigned between two professions of
      opposite interests and incompatible manners, was productive of
      beneficial and of pernicious consequences. It was seldom to be
      expected that the general and the civil governor of a province
      should either conspire for the disturbance, or should unite for
      the service, of their country. While the one delayed to offer the
      assistance which the other disdained to solicit, the troops very
      frequently remained without orders or without supplies; the
      public safety was betrayed, and the defenceless subjects were
      left exposed to the fury of the Barbarians. The divided
      administration which had been formed by Constantine, relaxed the
      vigor of the state, while it secured the tranquillity of the
      monarch.


      124 (return) [ See a very splendid example in the life of
      Agricola, particularly c. 20, 21. The lieutenant of Britain was
      intrusted with the same powers which Cicero, proconsul of
      Cilicia, had exercised in the name of the senate and people.]


      125 (return) [ The Abbé Dubos, who has examined with accuracy
      (see Hist. de la Monarchie Françoise, tom. i. p. 41-100, edit.
      1742) the institutions of Augustus and of Constantine, observes,
      that if Otho had been put to death the day before he executed his
      conspiracy, Otho would now appear in history as innocent as
      Corbulo.]


      126 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 110. Before the end of the
      reign of Constantius, the _magistri militum_ were already
      increased to four. See Velesius ad Ammian. l. xvi. c. 7.]


      127 (return) [ Though the military counts and dukes are
      frequently mentioned, both in history and the codes, we must have
      recourse to the Notitia for the exact knowledge of their number
      and stations. For the institution, rank, privileges, &c., of the
      counts in general see Cod. Theod. l. vi. tit. xii.—xx., with the
      commentary of Godefroy.]


      The memory of Constantine has been deservedly censured for
      another innovation, which corrupted military discipline and
      prepared the ruin of the empire. The nineteen years which
      preceded his final victory over Licinius, had been a period of
      license and intestine war. The rivals who contended for the
      possession of the Roman world, had withdrawn the greatest part of
      their forces from the guard of the general frontier; and the
      principal cities which formed the boundary of their respective
      dominions were filled with soldiers, who considered their
      countrymen as their most implacable enemies. After the use of
      these internal garrisons had ceased with the civil war, the
      conqueror wanted either wisdom or firmness to revive the severe
      discipline of Diocletian, and to suppress a fatal indulgence,
      which habit had endeared and almost confirmed to the military
      order. From the reign of Constantine, a popular and even legal
      distinction was admitted between the _Palatines_ 128 and the
      _Borderers;_ the troops of the court, as they were improperly
      styled, and the troops of the frontier. The former, elevated by
      the superiority of their pay and privileges, were permitted,
      except in the extraordinary emergencies of war, to occupy their
      tranquil stations in the heart of the provinces. The most
      flourishing cities were oppressed by the intolerable weight of
      quarters. The soldiers insensibly forgot the virtues of their
      profession, and contracted only the vices of civil life. They
      were either degraded by the industry of mechanic trades, or
      enervated by the luxury of baths and theatres. They soon became
      careless of their martial exercises, curious in their diet and
      apparel; and while they inspired terror to the subjects of the
      empire, they trembled at the hostile approach of the Barbarians.
      129 The chain of fortifications which Diocletian and his
      colleagues had extended along the banks of the great rivers, was
      no longer maintained with the same care, or defended with the
      same vigilance. The numbers which still remained under the name
      of the troops of the frontier, might be sufficient for the
      ordinary defence; but their spirit was degraded by the
      humiliating reflection, that _they_ who were exposed to the
      hardships and dangers of a perpetual warfare, were rewarded only
      with about two thirds of the pay and emoluments which were
      lavished on the troops of the court. Even the bands or legions
      that were raised the nearest to the level of those unworthy
      favorites, were in some measure disgraced by the title of honor
      which they were allowed to assume. It was in vain that
      Constantine repeated the most dreadful menaces of fire and sword
      against the Borderers who should dare desert their colors, to
      connive at the inroads of the Barbarians, or to participate in
      the spoil. 130 The mischiefs which flow from injudicious counsels
      are seldom removed by the application of partial severities; and
      though succeeding princes labored to restore the strength and
      numbers of the frontier garrisons, the empire, till the last
      moment of its dissolution, continued to languish under the mortal
      wound which had been so rashly or so weakly inflicted by the hand
      of Constantine.


      128 (return) [ Zosimus, l ii. p. 111. The distinction between the
      two classes of Roman troops, is very darkly expressed in the
      historians, the laws, and the Notitia. Consult, however, the
      copious _paratitlon_, or abstract, which Godefroy has drawn up of
      the seventh book, de Re Militari, of the Theodosian Code, l. vii.
      tit. i. leg. 18, l. viii. tit. i. leg. 10.]


      129 (return) [ Ferox erat in suos miles et rapax, ignavus vero in
      hostes et fractus. Ammian. l. xxii. c. 4. He observes, that they
      loved downy beds and houses of marble; and that their cups were
      heavier than their swords.]


      130 (return) [ Cod. Theod. l. vii. tit. i. leg. 1, tit. xii. leg.
      i. See Howell’s Hist. of the World, vol. ii. p. 19. That learned
      historian, who is not sufficiently known, labors to justify the
      character and policy of Constantine.]


      The same timid policy, of dividing whatever is united, of
      reducing whatever is eminent, of dreading every active power, and
      of expecting that the most feeble will prove the most obedient,
      seems to pervade the institutions of several princes, and
      particularly those of Constantine. The martial pride of the
      legions, whose victorious camps had so often been the scene of
      rebellion, was nourished by the memory of their past exploits,
      and the consciousness of their actual strength. As long as they
      maintained their ancient establishment of six thousand men, they
      subsisted, under the reign of Diocletian, each of them singly, a
      visible and important object in the military history of the Roman
      empire. A few years afterwards, these gigantic bodies were shrunk
      to a very diminutive size; and when _seven_ legions, with some
      auxiliaries, defended the city of Amida against the Persians, the
      total garrison, with the inhabitants of both sexes, and the
      peasants of the deserted country, did not exceed the number of
      twenty thousand persons. 131 From this fact, and from similar
      examples, there is reason to believe, that the constitution of
      the legionary troops, to which they partly owed their valor and
      discipline, was dissolved by Constantine; and that the bands of
      Roman infantry, which still assumed the same names and the same
      honors, consisted only of one thousand or fifteen hundred men.
      132 The conspiracy of so many separate detachments, each of which
      was awed by the sense of its own weakness, could easily be
      checked; and the successors of Constantine might indulge their
      love of ostentation, by issuing their orders to one hundred and
      thirty-two legions, inscribed on the muster-roll of their
      numerous armies. The remainder of their troops was distributed
      into several hundred cohorts of infantry, and squadrons of
      cavalry. Their arms, and titles, and ensigns, were calculated to
      inspire terror, and to display the variety of nations who marched
      under the Imperial standard. And not a vestige was left of that
      severe simplicity, which, in the ages of freedom and victory, had
      distinguished the line of battle of a Roman army from the
      confused host of an Asiatic monarch. 133 A more particular
      enumeration, drawn from the_ Notitia_, might exercise the
      diligence of an antiquary; but the historian will content himself
      with observing, that the number of permanent stations or
      garrisons established on the frontiers of the empire, amounted to
      five hundred and eighty-three; and that, under the successors of
      Constantine, the complete force of the military establishment was
      computed at six hundred and forty-five thousand soldiers. 134 An
      effort so prodigious surpassed the wants of a more ancient, and
      the faculties of a later, period.


      131 (return) [ Ammian. l. xix. c. 2. He observes, (c. 5,) that
      the desperate sallies of two Gallic legions were like a handful
      of water thrown on a great conflagration.]


      132 (return) [ Pancirolus ad Notitiam, p. 96. Mémoires de
      l’Académie des Inscriptions, tom. xxv. p. 491.]


      133 (return) [ Romana acies unius prope formæ erat et hominum et
      armorum genere.—Regia acies varia magis multis gentibus
      dissimilitudine armorum auxiliorumque erat. T. Liv. l. xxxvii. c.
      39, 40. Flaminius, even before the event, had compared the army
      of Antiochus to a supper in which the flesh of one vile animal
      was diversified by the skill of the cooks. See the Life of
      Flaminius in Plutarch.]


      134 (return) [ Agathias, l. v. p. 157, edit. Louvre.]


      In the various states of society, armies are recruited from very
      different motives. Barbarians are urged by the love of war; the
      citizens of a free republic may be prompted by a principle of
      duty; the subjects, or at least the nobles, of a monarchy, are
      animated by a sentiment of honor; but the timid and luxurious
      inhabitants of a declining empire must be allured into the
      service by the hopes of profit, or compelled by the dread of
      punishment. The resources of the Roman treasury were exhausted by
      the increase of pay, by the repetition of donatives, and by the
      invention of new emolument and indulgences, which, in the opinion
      of the provincial youth might compensate the hardships and
      dangers of a military life. Yet, although the stature was
      lowered, 135 although slaves, least by a tacit connivance, were
      indiscriminately received into the ranks, the insurmountable
      difficulty of procuring a regular and adequate supply of
      volunteers, obliged the emperors to adopt more effectual and
      coercive methods. The lands bestowed on the veterans, as the free
      reward of their valor were henceforward granted under a condition
      which contain the first rudiments of the feudal tenures; that
      their sons, who succeeded to the inheritance, should devote
      themselves to the profession of arms, as soon as they attained
      the age of manhood; and their cowardly refusal was punished by
      the loss of honor, of fortune, or even of life. 136 But as the
      annual growth of the sons of the veterans bore a very small
      proportion to the demands of the service, levies of men were
      frequently required from the provinces, and every proprietor was
      obliged either to take up arms, or to procure a substitute, or to
      purchase his exemption by the payment of a heavy fine. The sum of
      forty-two pieces of gold, to which it was _reduced_ ascertains
      the exorbitant price of volunteers, and the reluctance with which
      the government admitted of this alternative. 137 Such was the
      horror for the profession of a soldier, which had affected the
      minds of the degenerate Romans, that many of the youth of Italy
      and the provinces chose to cut off the fingers of their right
      hand, to escape from being pressed into the service; and this
      strange expedient was so commonly practised, as to deserve the
      severe animadversion of the laws, 138 and a peculiar name in the
      Latin language. 139


      135 (return) [ Valentinian (Cod. Theodos. l. vii. tit. xiii. leg.
      3) fixes the standard at five feet seven inches, about five feet
      four inches and a half, English measure. It had formerly been
      five feet ten inches, and in the best corps, six Roman feet. Sed
      tunc erat amplior multitude se et plures sequebantur militiam
      armatam. Vegetius de Re Militari l. i. c. v.]


      136 (return) [ See the two titles, De Veteranis and De Filiis
      Veteranorum, in the seventh book of the Theodosian Code. The age
      at which their military service was required, varied from
      twenty-five to sixteen. If the sons of the veterans appeared with
      a horse, they had a right to serve in the cavalry; two horses
      gave them some valuable privileges]


      137 (return) [ Cod. Theod. l. vii. tit. xiii. leg. 7. According
      to the historian Socrates, (see Godefroy ad loc.,) the same
      emperor Valens sometimes required eighty pieces of gold for a
      recruit. In the following law it is faintly expressed, that
      slaves shall not be admitted inter optimas lectissimorum militum
      turmas.]


      138 (return) [ The person and property of a Roman knight, who had
      mutilated his two sons, were sold at public auction by order of
      Augustus. (Sueton. in August. c. 27.) The moderation of that
      artful usurper proves, that this example of severity was
      justified by the spirit of the times. Ammianus makes a
      distinction between the effeminate Italians and the hardy Gauls.
      (L. xv. c. 12.) Yet only 15 years afterwards, Valentinian, in a
      law addressed to the præfect of Gaul, is obliged to enact that
      these cowardly deserters shall be burnt alive. (Cod. Theod. l.
      vii. tit. xiii. leg. 5.) Their numbers in Illyricum were so
      considerable, that the province complained of a scarcity of
      recruits. (Id. leg. 10.)]


      139 (return) [ They were called _Murci. Murcidus_ is found in
      Plautus and Festus, to denote a lazy and cowardly person, who,
      according to Arnobius and Augustin, was under the immediate
      protection of the goddess _Murcia_. From this particular instance
      of cowardice, _murcare_ is used as synonymous to _mutilare_, by
      the writers of the middle Latinity. See Linder brogius and
      Valesius ad Ammian. Marcellin, l. xv. c. 12]


      Chapter XVII: Foundation Of Constantinople.—Part V.


      The introduction of Barbarians into the Roman armies became every
      day more universal, more necessary, and more fatal. The most
      daring of the Scythians, of the Goths, and of the Germans, who
      delighted in war, and who found it more profitable to defend than
      to ravage the provinces, were enrolled, not only in the
      auxiliaries of their respective nations, but in the legions
      themselves, and among the most distinguished of the Palatine
      troops. As they freely mingled with the subjects of the empire,
      they gradually learned to despise their manners, and to imitate
      their arts. They abjured the implicit reverence which the pride
      of Rome had exacted from their ignorance, while they acquired the
      knowledge and possession of those advantages by which alone she
      supported her declining greatness. The Barbarian soldiers, who
      displayed any military talents, were advanced, without exception,
      to the most important commands; and the names of the tribunes, of
      the counts and dukes, and of the generals themselves, betray a
      foreign origin, which they no longer condescended to disguise.
      They were often intrusted with the conduct of a war against their
      countrymen; and though most of them preferred the ties of
      allegiance to those of blood, they did not always avoid the
      guilt, or at least the suspicion, of holding a treasonable
      correspondence with the enemy, of inviting his invasion, or of
      sparing his retreat. The camps and the palace of the son of
      Constantine were governed by the powerful faction of the Franks,
      who preserved the strictest connection with each other, and with
      their country, and who resented every personal affront as a
      national indignity. 140 When the tyrant Caligula was suspected of
      an intention to invest a very extraordinary candidate with the
      consular robes, the sacrilegious profanation would have scarcely
      excited less astonishment, if, instead of a horse, the noblest
      chieftain of Germany or Britain had been the object of his
      choice. The revolution of three centuries had produced so
      remarkable a change in the prejudices of the people, that, with
      the public approbation, Constantine showed his successors the
      example of bestowing the honors of the consulship on the
      Barbarians, who, by their merit and services, had deserved to be
      ranked among the first of the Romans. 141 But as these hardy
      veterans, who had been educated in the ignorance or contempt of
      the laws, were incapable of exercising any civil offices, the
      powers of the human mind were contracted by the irreconcilable
      separation of talents as well as of professions. The accomplished
      citizens of the Greek and Roman republics, whose characters could
      adapt themselves to the bar, the senate, the camp, or the
      schools, had learned to write, to speak, and to act with the same
      spirit, and with equal abilities.


      140 (return) [ Malarichus—adhibitis Francis quorum ea tempestate
      in palatio multitudo florebat, erectius jam loquebatur
      tumultuabaturque. Ammian. l. xv. c. 5.]


      141 (return) [ Barbaros omnium primus, ad usque fasces auxerat et
      trabeas consulares. Ammian. l. xx. c. 10. Eusebius (in Vit.
      Constantin. l. iv c.7) and Aurelius Victor seem to confirm the
      truth of this assertion yet in the thirty-two consular Fasti of
      the reign of Constantine cannot discover the name of a single
      Barbarian. I should therefore interpret the liberality of that
      prince as relative to the ornaments rather than to the office, of
      the consulship.]


      IV. Besides the magistrates and generals, who at a distance from
      the court diffused their delegated authority over the provinces
      and armies, the emperor conferred the rank of _Illustrious_ on
      seven of his more immediate servants, to whose fidelity he
      intrusted his safety, or his counsels, or his treasures. 1. The
      private apartments of the palace were governed by a favorite
      eunuch, who, in the language of that age, was styled the
      _præpositus_, or præfect of the sacred bed-chamber. His duty was
      to attend the emperor in his hours of state, or in those of
      amusement, and to perform about his person all those menial
      services, which can only derive their splendor from the influence
      of royalty. Under a prince who deserved to reign, the great
      chamberlain (for such we may call him) was a useful and humble
      domestic; but an artful domestic, who improves every occasion of
      unguarded confidence, will insensibly acquire over a feeble mind
      that ascendant which harsh wisdom and uncomplying virtue can
      seldom obtain. The degenerate grandsons of Theodosius, who were
      invisible to their subjects, and contemptible to their enemies,
      exalted the præfects of their bed-chamber above the heads of all
      the ministers of the palace; 142 and even his deputy, the first
      of the splendid train of slaves who waited in the presence, was
      thought worthy to rank before the _respectable_ proconsuls of
      Greece or Asia. The jurisdiction of the chamberlain was
      acknowledged by the _counts_, or superintendents, who regulated
      the two important provinces of the magnificence of the wardrobe,
      and of the luxury of the Imperial table. 143 2. The principal
      administration of public affairs was committed to the diligence
      and abilities of the _master of the offices_. 144 He was the
      supreme magistrate of the palace, inspected the discipline of the
      civil and military _schools_, and received appeals from all parts
      of the empire, in the causes which related to that numerous army
      of privileged persons, who, as the servants of the court, had
      obtained for themselves and families a right to decline the
      authority of the ordinary judges. The correspondence between the
      prince and his subjects was managed by the four _scrinia_, or
      offices of this minister of state. The first was appropriated to
      memorials, the second to epistles, the third to petitions, and
      the fourth to papers and orders of a miscellaneous kind. Each of
      these was directed by an _inferior_ master of _respectable_
      dignity, and the whole business was despatched by a hundred and
      forty-eight secretaries, chosen for the most part from the
      profession of the law, on account of the variety of abstracts of
      reports and references which frequently occurred in the exercise
      of their several functions. From a condescension, which in former
      ages would have been esteemed unworthy the Roman majesty, a
      particular secretary was allowed for the Greek language; and
      interpreters were appointed to receive the ambassadors of the
      Barbarians; but the department of foreign affairs, which
      constitutes so essential a part of modern policy, seldom diverted
      the attention of the master of the offices. His mind was more
      seriously engaged by the general direction of the posts and
      arsenals of the empire. There were thirty-four cities, fifteen in
      the East, and nineteen in the West, in which regular companies of
      workmen were perpetually employed in fabricating defensive armor,
      offensive weapons of all sorts, and military engines, which were
      deposited in the arsenals, and occasionally delivered for the
      service of the troops. 3. In the course of nine centuries, the
      office of _quæstor_ had experienced a very singular revolution.
      In the infancy of Rome, two inferior magistrates were annually
      elected by the people, to relieve the consuls from the invidious
      management of the public treasure; 145 a similar assistant was
      granted to every proconsul, and to every prætor, who exercised a
      military or provincial command; with the extent of conquest, the
      two quæstors were gradually multiplied to the number of four, of
      eight, of twenty, and, for a short time, perhaps, of forty; 146
      and the noblest citizens ambitiously solicited an office which
      gave them a seat in the senate, and a just hope of obtaining the
      honors of the republic. Whilst Augustus affected to maintain the
      freedom of election, he consented to accept the annual privilege
      of recommending, or rather indeed of nominating, a certain
      proportion of candidates; and it was his custom to select one of
      these distinguished youths, to read his orations or epistles in
      the assemblies of the senate. 147 The practice of Augustus was
      imitated by succeeding princes; the occasional commission was
      established as a permanent office; and the favored quæstor,
      assuming a new and more illustrious character, alone survived the
      suppression of his ancient and useless colleagues. 148 As the
      orations which he composed in the name of the emperor, 149
      acquired the force, and, at length, the form, of absolute edicts,
      he was considered as the representative of the legislative power,
      the oracle of the council, and the original source of the civil
      jurisprudence. He was sometimes invited to take his seat in the
      supreme judicature of the Imperial consistory, with the Prætorian
      præfects, and the master of the offices; and he was frequently
      requested to resolve the doubts of inferior judges: but as he was
      not oppressed with a variety of subordinate business, his leisure
      and talents were employed to cultivate that dignified style of
      eloquence, which, in the corruption of taste and language, still
      preserves the majesty of the Roman laws. 150 In some respects,
      the office of the Imperial quæstor may be compared with that of a
      modern chancellor; but the use of a great seal, which seems to
      have been adopted by the illiterate barbarians, was never
      introduced to attest the public acts of the emperors. 4. The
      extraordinary title of _count of the sacred largesses_ was
      bestowed on the treasurer-general of the revenue, with the
      intention perhaps of inculcating, that every payment flowed from
      the voluntary bounty of the monarch. To conceive the almost
      infinite detail of the annual and daily expense of the civil and
      military administration in every part of a great empire, would
      exceed the powers of the most vigorous imagination.


      The actual account employed several hundred persons, distributed
      into eleven different offices, which were artfully contrived to
      examine and control their respective operations. The multitude of
      these agents had a natural tendency to increase; and it was more
      than once thought expedient to dismiss to their native homes the
      useless supernumeraries, who, deserting their honest labors, had
      pressed with too much eagerness into the lucrative profession of
      the finances. 151 Twenty-nine provincial receivers, of whom
      eighteen were honored with the title of count, corresponded with
      the treasurer; and he extended his jurisdiction over the mines
      from whence the precious metals were extracted, over the mints,
      in which they were converted into the current coin, and over the
      public treasuries of the most important cities, where they were
      deposited for the service of the state. The foreign trade of the
      empire was regulated by this minister, who directed likewise all
      the linen and woollen manufactures, in which the successive
      operations of spinning, weaving, and dyeing were executed,
      chiefly by women of a servile condition, for the use of the
      palace and army. Twenty-six of these institutions are enumerated
      in the West, where the arts had been more recently introduced,
      and a still larger proportion may be allowed for the industrious
      provinces of the East. 152 5. Besides the public revenue, which
      an absolute monarch might levy and expend according to his
      pleasure, the emperors, in the capacity of opulent citizens,
      possessed a very extensive property, which was administered by
      the _count_ or treasurer of _the private estate_. Some part had
      perhaps been the ancient demesnes of kings and republics; some
      accessions might be derived from the families which were
      successively invested with the purple; but the most considerable
      portion flowed from the impure source of confiscations and
      forfeitures. The Imperial estates were scattered through the
      provinces, from Mauritania to Britain; but the rich and fertile
      soil of Cappadocia tempted the monarch to acquire in that country
      his fairest possessions, 153 and either Constantine or his
      successors embraced the occasion of justifying avarice by
      religious zeal. They suppressed the rich temple of Comana, where
      the high priest of the goddess of war supported the dignity of a
      sovereign prince; and they applied to their private use the
      consecrated lands, which were inhabited by six thousand subjects
      or slaves of the deity and her ministers. 154 But these were not
      the valuable inhabitants: the plains that stretch from the foot
      of Mount Argæus to the banks of the Sarus, bred a generous race
      of horses, renowned above all others in the ancient world for
      their majestic shape and incomparable swiftness. These _sacred_
      animals, destined for the service of the palace and the Imperial
      games, were protected by the laws from the profanation of a
      vulgar master. 155 The demesnes of Cappadocia were important
      enough to require the inspection of a count; 156 officers of an
      inferior rank were stationed in the other parts of the empire;
      and the deputies of the private, as well as those of the public,
      treasurer were maintained in the exercise of their independent
      functions, and encouraged to control the authority of the
      provincial magistrates. 157 6, 7. The chosen bands of cavalry and
      infantry, which guarded the person of the emperor, were under the
      immediate command of the _two counts of the domestics_. The whole
      number consisted of three thousand five hundred men, divided into
      seven _schools_, or troops, of five hundred each; and in the
      East, this honorable service was almost entirely appropriated to
      the Armenians. Whenever, on public ceremonies, they were drawn up
      in the courts and porticos of the palace, their lofty stature,
      silent order, and splendid arms of silver and gold, displayed a
      martial pomp not unworthy of the Roman majesty. 158 From the
      seven schools two companies of horse and foot were selected, of
      the _protectors_, whose advantageous station was the hope and
      reward of the most deserving soldiers. They mounted guard in the
      interior apartments, and were occasionally despatched into the
      provinces, to execute with celerity and vigor the orders of their
      master. 159 The counts of the domestics had succeeded to the
      office of the Prætorian præfects; like the præfects, they aspired
      from the service of the palace to the command of armies.


      142 (return) [ Cod. Theod. l. vi. tit. 8.]


      143 (return) [ By a very singular metaphor, borrowed from the
      military character of the first emperors, the steward of their
      household was styled the count of their camp, (comes castrensis.)
      Cassiodorus very seriously represents to him, that his own fame,
      and that of the empire, must depend on the opinion which foreign
      ambassadors may conceive of the plenty and magnificence of the
      royal table. (Variar. l. vi. epistol. 9.)]


      144 (return) [ Gutherius (de Officiis Domûs Augustæ, l. ii. c.
      20, l. iii.) has very accurately explained the functions of the
      master of the offices, and the constitution of the subordinate
      _scrinia_. But he vainly attempts, on the most doubtful
      authority, to deduce from the time of the Antonines, or even of
      Nero, the origin of a magistrate who cannot be found in history
      before the reign of Constantine.]


      145 (return) [ Tacitus (Annal. xi. 22) says, that the first
      quæstors were elected by the people, sixty-four years after the
      foundation of the republic; but he is of opinion, that they had,
      long before that period, been annually appointed by the consuls,
      and even by the kings. But this obscure point of antiquity is
      contested by other writers.]


      146 (return) [ Tacitus (Annal. xi. 22) seems to consider twenty
      as the highest number of quæstors; and Dion (l. xliii. p 374)
      insinuates, that if the dictator Cæsar once created forty, it was
      only to facilitate the payment of an immense debt of gratitude.
      Yet the augmentation which he made of prætors subsisted under the
      succeeding reigns.]


      147 (return) [ Sueton. in August. c. 65, and Torrent. ad loc.
      Dion. Cas. p. 755.]


      148 (return) [ The youth and inexperience of the quæstors, who
      entered on that important office in their twenty-fifth year,
      (Lips. Excurs. ad Tacit. l. iii. D.,) engaged Augustus to remove
      them from the management of the treasury; and though they were
      restored by Claudius, they seem to have been finally dismissed by
      Nero. (Tacit Annal. xiii. 29. Sueton. in Aug. c. 36, in Claud. c.
      24. Dion, p. 696, 961, &c. Plin. Epistol. x. 20, et alibi.) In
      the provinces of the Imperial division, the place of the quæstors
      was more ably supplied by the _procurators_, (Dion Cas. p. 707.
      Tacit. in Vit. Agricol. c. 15;) or, as they were afterwards
      called, _rationales_. (Hist. August. p. 130.) But in the
      provinces of the senate we may still discover a series of
      quæstors till the reign of Marcus Antoninus. (See the
      Inscriptions of Gruter, the Epistles of Pliny, and a decisive
      fact in the Augustan History, p. 64.) From Ulpian we may learn,
      (Pandect. l. i. tit. 13,) that under the government of the house
      of Severus, their provincial administration was abolished; and in
      the subsequent troubles, the annual or triennial elections of
      quæstors must have naturally ceased.]


      149 (return) [ Cum patris nomine et epistolas ipse dictaret, et
      edicta conscrib eret, orationesque in senatu recitaret, etiam
      quæstoris vice. Sueton, in Tit. c. 6. The office must have
      acquired new dignity, which was occasionally executed by the heir
      apparent of the empire. Trajan intrusted the same care to
      Hadrian, his quæstor and cousin. See Dodwell, Prælection.
      Cambden, x. xi. p. 362-394.]


      150 (return) [ Terris edicta daturus; Supplicibus
      responsa.—Oracula regis Eloquio crevere tuo; nec dignius unquam
      Majestas meminit sese Romana locutam.——Claudian in Consulat.
      Mall. Theodor. 33. See likewise Symmachus (Epistol. i. 17) and
      Cassiodorus. (Variar. iv. 5.)]


      151 (return) [ Cod. Theod. l. vi. tit. 30. Cod. Justinian. l.
      xii. tit. 24.]


      152 (return) [ In the departments of the two counts of the
      treasury, the eastern part of the _Notitia_ happens to be very
      defective. It may be observed, that we had a treasury chest in
      London, and a gyneceum or manufacture at Winchester. But Britain
      was not thought worthy either of a mint or of an arsenal. Gaul
      alone possessed three of the former, and eight of the latter.]


      153 (return) [ Cod. Theod. l. vi. tit. xxx. leg. 2, and Godefroy
      ad loc.]


      154 (return) [ Strabon. Geograph. l. xxii. p. 809, [edit.
      Casaub.] The other temple of Comana, in Pontus, was a colony from
      that of Cappadocia, l. xii. p. 835. The President Des Brosses
      (see his Saluste, tom. ii. p. 21, [edit. Causub.]) conjectures
      that the deity adored in both Comanas was Beltis, the Venus of
      the east, the goddess of generation; a very different being
      indeed from the goddess of war.]


      155 (return) [ Cod. Theod. l. x. tit. vi. de Grege Dominico.
      Godefroy has collected every circumstance of antiquity relative
      to the Cappadocian horses. One of the finest breeds, the
      Palmatian, was the forfeiture of a rebel, whose estate lay about
      sixteen miles from Tyana, near the great road between
      Constantinople and Antioch.]


      156 (return) [ Justinian (Novell. 30) subjected the province of
      the count of Cappadocia to the immediate authority of the
      favorite eunuch, who presided over the sacred bed-chamber.]


      157 (return) [ Cod. Theod. l. vi. tit. xxx. leg. 4, &c.]


      158 (return) [ Pancirolus, p. 102, 136. The appearance of these
      military domestics is described in the Latin poem of Corippus, de
      Laudibus Justin. l. iii. 157-179. p. 419, 420 of the Appendix
      Hist. Byzantin. Rom. 177.]


      159 (return) [ Ammianus Marcellinus, who served so many years,
      obtained only the rank of a protector. The first ten among these
      honorable soldiers were _Clarissimi_.]


      The perpetual intercourse between the court and the provinces was
      facilitated by the construction of roads and the institution of
      posts. But these beneficial establishments were accidentally
      connected with a pernicious and intolerable abuse. Two or three
      hundred _agents_ or messengers were employed, under the
      jurisdiction of the master of the offices, to announce the names
      of the annual consuls, and the edicts or victories of the
      emperors. They insensibly assumed the license of reporting
      whatever they could observe of the conduct either of magistrates
      or of private citizens; and were soon considered as the eyes of
      the monarch, 160 and the scourge of the people. Under the warm
      influence of a feeble reign, they multiplied to the incredible
      number of ten thousand, disdained the mild though frequent
      admonitions of the laws, and exercised in the profitable
      management of the posts a rapacious and insolent oppression.
      These official spies, who regularly corresponded with the palace,
      were encouraged by favor and reward, anxiously to watch the
      progress of every treasonable design, from the faint and latent
      symptoms of disaffection, to the actual preparation of an open
      revolt. Their careless or criminal violation of truth and justice
      was covered by the consecrated mask of zeal; and they might
      securely aim their poisoned arrows at the breast either of the
      guilty or the innocent, who had provoked their resentment, or
      refused to purchase their silence. A faithful subject, of Syria
      perhaps, or of Britain, was exposed to the danger, or at least to
      the dread, of being dragged in chains to the court of Milan or
      Constantinople, to defend his life and fortune against the
      malicious charge of these privileged informers. The ordinary
      administration was conducted by those methods which extreme
      necessity can alone palliate; and the defects of evidence were
      diligently supplied by the use of torture. 161


      160 (return) [ Xenophon, Cyropæd. l. viii. Brisson, de Regno
      Persico, l. i No 190, p. 264. The emperors adopted with pleasure
      this Persian metaphor.]


      161 (return) [ For the _Agentes in Rebus_, see Ammian. l. xv. c.
      3, l. xvi. c. 5, l. xxii. c. 7, with the curious annotations of
      Valesius. Cod. Theod. l. vi. tit. xxvii. xxviii. xxix. Among the
      passages collected in the Commentary of Godefroy, the most
      remarkable is one from Libanius, in his discourse concerning the
      death of Julian.]


      The deceitful and dangerous experiment of the criminal
      _quæstion_, as it is emphatically styled, was admitted, rather
      than approved, in the jurisprudence of the Romans. They applied
      this sanguinary mode of examination only to servile bodies, whose
      sufferings were seldom weighed by those haughty republicans in
      the scale of justice or humanity; but they would never consent to
      violate the sacred person of a citizen, till they possessed the
      clearest evidence of his guilt. 162 The annals of tyranny, from
      the reign of Tiberius to that of Domitian, circumstantially
      relate the executions of many innocent victims; but, as long as
      the faintest remembrance was kept alive of the national freedom
      and honor, the last hours of a Roman were secured from the danger
      of ignominions torture. 163 The conduct of the provincial
      magistrates was not, however, regulated by the practice of the
      city, or the strict maxims of the civilians. They found the use
      of torture established not only among the slaves of oriental
      despotism, but among the Macedonians, who obeyed a limited
      monarch; among the Rhodians, who flourished by the liberty of
      commerce; and even among the sage Athenians, who had asserted and
      adorned the dignity of human kind. 164 The acquiescence of the
      provincials encouraged their governors to acquire, or perhaps to
      usurp, a discretionary power of employing the rack, to extort
      from vagrants or plebeian criminals the confession of their
      guilt, till they insensibly proceeded to confound the distinction
      of rank, and to disregard the privileges of Roman citizens. The
      apprehensions of the subjects urged them to solicit, and the
      interest of the sovereign engaged him to grant, a variety of
      special exemptions, which tacitly allowed, and even authorized,
      the general use of torture. They protected all persons of
      illustrious or honorable rank, bishops and their presbyters,
      professors of the liberal arts, soldiers and their families,
      municipal officers, and their posterity to the third generation,
      and all children under the age of puberty. 165 But a fatal maxim
      was introduced into the new jurisprudence of the empire, that in
      the case of treason, which included every offence that the
      subtlety of lawyers could derive from a _hostile intention_
      towards the prince or republic, 166 all privileges were
      suspended, and all conditions were reduced to the same
      ignominious level. As the safety of the emperor was avowedly
      preferred to every consideration of justice or humanity, the
      dignity of age and the tenderness of youth were alike exposed to
      the most cruel tortures; and the terrors of a malicious
      information, which might select them as the accomplices, or even
      as the witnesses, perhaps, of an imaginary crime, perpetually
      hung over the heads of the principal citizens of the Roman world.
      167


      162 (return) [ The Pandects (l. xlviii. tit. xviii.) contain the
      sentiments of the most celebrated civilians on the subject of
      torture. They strictly confine it to slaves; and Ulpian himself
      is ready to acknowledge that Res est fragilis, et periculosa, et
      quæ veritatem fallat.]


      163 (return) [ In the conspiracy of Piso against Nero, Epicharis
      (libertina mulier) was the only person tortured; the rest were
      _intacti tormentis_. It would be superfluous to add a weaker, and
      it would be difficult to find a stronger, example. Tacit. Annal.
      xv. 57.]


      164 (return) [ Dicendum... de Institutis Atheniensium, Rhodiorum,
      doctissimorum hominum, apud quos etiam (id quod acerbissimum est)
      liberi, civesque torquentur. Cicero, Partit. Orat. c. 34. We may
      learn from the trial of Philotas the practice of the Macedonians.
      (Diodor. Sicul. l. xvii. p. 604. Q. Curt. l. vi. c. 11.)]


      165 (return) [ Heineccius (Element. Jur. Civil. part vii. p. 81)
      has collected these exemptions into one view.]


      166 (return) [ This definition of the sage Ulpian (Pandect. l.
      xlviii. tit. iv.) seems to have been adapted to the court of
      Caracalla, rather than to that of Alexander Severus. See the
      Codes of Theodosius and ad leg. Juliam majestatis.]


      167 (return) [ Arcadius Charisius is the oldest lawyer quoted to
      justify the universal practice of torture in all cases of
      treason; but this maxim of tyranny, which is admitted by Ammianus
      with the most respectful terror, is enforced by several laws of
      the successors of Constantine. See Cod. Theod. l. ix. tit. xxxv.
      majestatis crimine omnibus æqua est conditio.]


      These evils, however terrible they may appear, were confined to
      the smaller number of Roman subjects, whose dangerous situation
      was in some degree compensated by the enjoyment of those
      advantages, either of nature or of fortune, which exposed them to
      the jealousy of the monarch. The obscure millions of a great
      empire have much less to dread from the cruelty than from the
      avarice of their masters, and _their_ humble happiness is
      principally affected by the grievance of excessive taxes, which,
      gently pressing on the wealthy, descend with accelerated weight
      on the meaner and more indigent classes of society. An ingenious
      philosopher 168 has calculated the universal measure of the
      public impositions by the degrees of freedom and servitude; and
      ventures to assert, that, according to an invariable law of
      nature, it must always increase with the former, and diminish in
      a just proportion to the latter. But this reflection, which would
      tend to alleviate the miseries of despotism, is contradicted at
      least by the history of the Roman empire; which accuses the same
      princes of despoiling the senate of its authority, and the
      provinces of their wealth. Without abolishing all the various
      customs and duties on merchandises, which are imperceptibly
      discharged by the apparent choice of the purchaser, the policy of
      Constantine and his successors preferred a simple and direct mode
      of taxation, more congenial to the spirit of an arbitrary
      government. 169


      168 (return) [ Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, l. xii. c. 13.]


      169 (return) [ Mr. Hume (Essays, vol. i. p. 389) has seen this
      importance with some degree of perplexity.]


      Chapter XVII: Foundation Of Constantinople.—Part VI.


      The name and use of the _indictions_, 170 which serve to
      ascertain the chronology of the middle ages, were derived from
      the regular practice of the Roman tributes. 171 The emperor
      subscribed with his own hand, and in purple ink, the solemn
      edict, or indiction, which was fixed up in the principal city of
      each diocese, during two months previous to the first day of
      September. And by a very easy connection of ideas, the word
      _indiction_ was transferred to the measure of tribute which it
      prescribed, and to the annual term which it allowed for the
      payment. This general estimate of the supplies was proportioned
      to the real and imaginary wants of the state; but as often as the
      expense exceeded the revenue, or the revenue fell short of the
      computation, an additional tax, under the name of
      _superindiction_, was imposed on the people, and the most
      valuable attribute of sovereignty was communicated to the
      Prætorian præfects, who, on some occasions, were permitted to
      provide for the unforeseen and extraordinary exigencies of the
      public service. The execution of these laws (which it would be
      tedious to pursue in their minute and intricate detail) consisted
      of two distinct operations: the resolving the general imposition
      into its constituent parts, which were assessed on the provinces,
      the cities, and the individuals of the Roman world; and the
      collecting the separate contributions of the individuals, the
      cities, and the provinces, till the accumulated sums were poured
      into the Imperial treasuries. But as the account between the
      monarch and the subject was perpetually open, and as the renewal
      of the demand anticipated the perfect discharge of the preceding
      obligation, the weighty machine of the finances was moved by the
      same hands round the circle of its yearly revolution. Whatever
      was honorable or important in the administration of the revenue,
      was committed to the wisdom of the præfects, and their provincia.
      representatives; the lucrative functions were claimed by a crowd
      of subordinate officers, some of whom depended on the treasurer,
      others on the governor of the province; and who, in the
      inevitable conflicts of a perplexed jurisdiction, had frequent
      opportunities of disputing with each other the spoils of the
      people. The laborious offices, which could be productive only of
      envy and reproach, of expense and danger, were imposed on the
      _Decurions_, who formed the corporations of the cities, and whom
      the severity of the Imperial laws had condemned to sustain the
      burdens of civil society. 172 The whole landed property of the
      empire (without excepting the patrimonial estates of the monarch)
      was the object of ordinary taxation; and every new purchaser
      contracted the obligations of the former proprietor. An accurate
      _census_, 173 or survey, was the only equitable mode of
      ascertaining the proportion which every citizen should be obliged
      to contribute for the public service; and from the well-known
      period of the indictions, there is reason to believe that this
      difficult and expensive operation was repeated at the regular
      distance of fifteen years. The lands were measured by surveyors,
      who were sent into the provinces; their nature, whether arable or
      pasture, or vineyards or woods, was distinctly reported; and an
      estimate was made of their common value from the average produce
      of five years. The numbers of slaves and of cattle constituted an
      essential part of the report; an oath was administered to the
      proprietors, which bound them to disclose the true state of their
      affairs; and their attempts to prevaricate, or elude the
      intention of the legislator, were severely watched, and punished
      as a capital crime, which included the double guilt of treason
      and sacrilege. 174 A large portion of the tribute was paid in
      money; and of the current coin of the empire, gold alone could be
      legally accepted. 175 The remainder of the taxes, according to
      the proportions determined by the annual indiction, was furnished
      in a manner still more direct, and still more oppressive.
      According to the different nature of lands, their real produce in
      the various articles of wine or oil, corn or barley, wood or
      iron, was transported by the labor or at the expense of the
      provincials 17511 to the Imperial magazines, from whence they
      were occasionally distributed for the use of the court, of the
      army, and of two capitals, Rome and Constantinople. The
      commissioners of the revenue were so frequently obliged to make
      considerable purchases, that they were strictly prohibited from
      allowing any compensation, or from receiving in money the value
      of those supplies which were exacted in kind. In the primitive
      simplicity of small communities, this method may be well adapted
      to collect the almost voluntary offerings of the people; but it
      is at once susceptible of the utmost latitude, and of the utmost
      strictness, which in a corrupt and absolute monarchy must
      introduce a perpetual contest between the power of oppression and
      the arts of fraud. 176 The agriculture of the Roman provinces was
      insensibly ruined, and, in the progress of despotism which tends
      to disappoint its own purpose, the emperors were obliged to
      derive some merit from the forgiveness of debts, or the remission
      of tributes, which their subjects were utterly incapable of
      paying. According to the new division of Italy, the fertile and
      happy province of Campania, the scene of the early victories and
      of the delicious retirements of the citizens of Rome, extended
      between the sea and the Apennine, from the Tiber to the Silarus.
      Within sixty years after the death of Constantine, and on the
      evidence of an actual survey, an exemption was granted in favor
      of three hundred and thirty thousand English acres of desert and
      uncultivated land; which amounted to one eighth of the whole
      surface of the province. As the footsteps of the Barbarians had
      not yet been seen in Italy, the cause of this amazing desolation,
      which is recorded in the laws, can be ascribed only to the
      administration of the Roman emperors. 177


      170 (return) [ The cycle of indictions, which may be traced as
      high as the reign of Constantius, or perhaps of his father,
      Constantine, is still employed by the Papal court; but the
      commencement of the year has been very reasonably altered to the
      first of January. See l’Art de Verifier les Dates, p. xi.; and
      Dictionnaire Raison. de la Diplomatique, tom. ii. p. 25; two
      accurate treatises, which come from the workshop of the
      Benedictines. —— It does not appear that the establishment of the
      indiction is to be at tributed to Constantine: it existed before
      he had been created _Augustus_ at Rome, and the remission granted
      by him to the city of Autun is the proof. He would not have
      ventured while only _Cæsar_, and under the necessity of courting
      popular favor, to establish such an odious impost. Aurelius
      Victor and Lactantius agree in designating Diocletian as the
      author of this despotic institution. Aur. Vict. de Cæs. c. 39.
      Lactant. de Mort. Pers. c. 7—G.]


      171 (return) [ The first twenty-eight titles of the eleventh book
      of the Theodosian Code are filled with the circumstantial
      regulations on the important subject of tributes; but they
      suppose a clearer knowledge of fundamental principles than it is
      at present in our power to attain.]


      172 (return) [ The title concerning the Decurions (l. xii. tit.
      i.) is the most ample in the whole Theodosian Code; since it
      contains not less than one hundred and ninety-two distinct laws
      to ascertain the duties and privileges of that useful order of
      citizens. * Note: The Decurions were charged with assessing,
      according to the census of property prepared by the tabularii,
      the payment due from each proprietor. This odious office was
      authoritatively imposed on the richest citizens of each town;
      they had no salary, and all their compensation was, to be exempt
      from certain corporal punishments, in case they should have
      incurred them. The Decurionate was the ruin of all the rich.
      Hence they tried every way of avoiding this dangerous honor; they
      concealed themselves, they entered into military service; but
      their efforts were unavailing; they were seized, they were
      compelled to become Decurions, and the dread inspired by this
      title was termed _Impiety_.—G. ——The Decurions were mutually
      responsible; they were obliged to undertake for pieces of ground
      abandoned by their owners on account of the pressure of the
      taxes, and, finally, to make up all deficiencies. Savigny chichte
      des Rom. Rechts, i. 25.—M.]


      173 (return) [ Habemus enim et hominum numerum qui delati sunt,
      et agrun modum. Eumenius in Panegyr. Vet. viii. 6. See Cod.
      Theod. l. xiii. tit. x. xi., with Godefroy’s Commentary.]


      174 (return) [ Siquis sacrilegâ vitem falce succiderit, aut
      feracium ramorum fœtus hebetaverit, quo delinet fidem Censuum, et
      mentiatur callide paupertatis ingenium, mox detectus capitale
      subibit exitium, et bona ejus in Fisci jura migrabunt. Cod.
      Theod. l. xiii. tit. xi. leg. 1. Although this law is not without
      its studied obscurity, it is, however clear enough to prove the
      minuteness of the inquisition, and the disproportion of the
      penalty.]


      175 (return) [ The astonishment of Pliny would have ceased.
      Equidem miror P. R. victis gentibus argentum semper imperitasse
      non aurum. Hist Natur. xxxiii. 15.]


      17511 (return) [ The proprietors were not charged with the
      expense of this transport in the provinces situated on the
      sea-shore or near the great rivers, there were companies of
      boatmen, and of masters of vessels, who had this commission, and
      furnished the means of transport at their own expense. In return,
      they were themselves exempt, altogether, or in part, from the
      indiction and other imposts. They had certain privileges;
      particular regulations determined their rights and obligations.
      (Cod. Theod. l. xiii. tit. v. ix.) The transports by land were
      made in the same manner, by the intervention of a privileged
      company called Bastaga; the members were called Bastagarii Cod.
      Theod. l. viii. tit. v.—G.]


      176 (return) [ Some precautions were taken (see Cod. Theod. l.
      xi. tit. ii. and Cod. Justinian. l. x. tit. xxvii. leg. 1, 2, 3)
      to restrain the magistrates from the abuse of their authority,
      either in the exaction or in the purchase of corn: but those who
      had learning enough to read the orations of Cicero against
      Verres, (iii. de Frumento,) might instruct themselves in all the
      various arts of oppression, with regard to the weight, the price,
      the quality, and the carriage. The avarice of an unlettered
      governor would supply the ignorance of precept or precedent.]


      177 (return) [ Cod. Theod. l. xi. tit. xxviii. leg. 2, published
      the 24th of March, A. D. 395, by the emperor Honorius, only two
      months after the death of his father, Theodosius. He speaks of
      528,042 Roman jugera, which I have reduced to the English
      measure. The jugerum contained 28,800 square Roman feet.]


      Either from design or from accident, the mode of assessment
      seemed to unite the substance of a land tax with the forms of a
      capitation. 178 The returns which were sent of every province or
      district, expressed the number of tributary subjects, and the
      amount of the public impositions. The latter of these sums was
      divided by the former; and the estimate, that such a province
      contained so many _capita_, or heads of tribute; and that each
      _head_ was rated at such a price, was universally received, not
      only in the popular, but even in the legal computation. The value
      of a tributary head must have varied, according to many
      accidental, or at least fluctuating circumstances; but some
      knowledge has been preserved of a very curious fact, the more
      important, since it relates to one of the richest provinces of
      the Roman empire, and which now flourishes as the most splendid
      of the European kingdoms. The rapacious ministers of Constantius
      had exhausted the wealth of Gaul, by exacting twenty-five pieces
      of gold for the annual tribute of every head. The humane policy
      of his successor reduced the capitation to seven pieces. 179 A
      moderate proportion between these opposite extremes of
      extraordinary oppression and of transient indulgence, may
      therefore be fixed at sixteen pieces of gold, or about nine
      pounds sterling, the common standard, perhaps, of the impositions
      of Gaul. 180 But this calculation, or rather, indeed, the facts
      from whence it is deduced, cannot fail of suggesting two
      difficulties to a thinking mind, who will be at once surprised by
      the _equality_, and by the _enormity_, of the capitation. An
      attempt to explain them may perhaps reflect some light on the
      interesting subject of the finances of the declining empire.


      178 (return) [ Godefroy (Cod. Theod. tom. vi. p. 116) argues with
      weight and learning on the subject of the capitation; but while
      he explains the _caput_, as a share or measure of property, he
      too absolutely excludes the idea of a personal assessment.]


      179 (return) [ Quid profuerit (_Julianus_) anhelantibus extremâ
      penuriâ Gallis, hinc maxime claret, quod primitus partes eas
      ingressus, pro _capitibus_ singulis tributi nomine vicenos quinos
      aureos reperit flagitari; discedens vero septenos tantum numera
      universa complentes. Ammian. l. xvi. c. 5.]


      180 (return) [ In the calculation of any sum of money under
      Constantine and his successors, we need only refer to the
      excellent discourse of Mr. Greaves on the Denarius, for the proof
      of the following principles; 1. That the ancient and modern Roman
      pound, containing 5256 grains of Troy weight, is about one
      twelfth lighter than the English pound, which is composed of 5760
      of the same grains. 2. That the pound of gold, which had once
      been divided into forty-eight _aurei_, was at this time coined
      into seventy-two smaller pieces of the same denomination. 3. That
      five of these aurei were the legal tender for a pound of silver,
      and that consequently the pound of gold was exchanged for
      fourteen pounds eight ounces of silver, according to the Roman,
      or about thirteen pounds according to the English weight. 4. That
      the English pound of silver is coined into sixty-two shillings.
      From these elements we may compute the Roman pound of gold, the
      usual method of reckoning large sums, at forty pounds sterling,
      and we may fix the currency of the _aureus_ at somewhat more than
      eleven shillings. * Note: See, likewise, a Dissertation of M.
      Letronne, “Considerations Génerales sur l’Evaluation des Monnaies
      Grecques et Romaines” Paris, 1817—M.]


      I. It is obvious, that, as long as the immutable constitution of
      human nature produces and maintains so unequal a division of
      property, the most numerous part of the community would be
      deprived of their subsistence, by the equal assessment of a tax
      from which the sovereign would derive a very trifling revenue.
      Such indeed might be the theory of the Roman capitation; but in
      the practice, this unjust equality was no longer felt, as the
      tribute was collected on the principle of a _real_, not of a
      _personal_ imposition. 18011 Several indigent citizens
      contributed to compose a single _head_, or share of taxation;
      while the wealthy provincial, in proportion to his fortune, alone
      represented several of those imaginary beings. In a poetical
      request, addressed to one of the last and most deserving of the
      Roman princes who reigned in Gaul, Sidonius Apollinaris
      personifies his tribute under the figure of a triple monster, the
      Geryon of the Grecian fables, and entreats the new Hercules that
      he would most graciously be pleased to save his life by cutting
      off three of his heads. 181 The fortune of Sidonius far exceeded
      the customary wealth of a poet; but if he had pursued the
      allusion, he might have painted many of the Gallic nobles with
      the hundred heads of the deadly Hydra, spreading over the face of
      the country, and devouring the substance of a hundred families.
      II. The difficulty of allowing an annual sum of about nine pounds
      sterling, even for the average of the capitation of Gaul, may be
      rendered more evident by the comparison of the present state of
      the same country, as it is now governed by the absolute monarch
      of an industrious, wealthy, and affectionate people. The taxes of
      France cannot be magnified, either by fear or by flattery, beyond
      the annual amount of eighteen millions sterling, which ought
      perhaps to be shared among four and twenty millions of
      inhabitants. 182 Seven millions of these, in the capacity of
      fathers, or brothers, or husbands, may discharge the obligations
      of the remaining multitude of women and children; yet the equal
      proportion of each tributary subject will scarcely rise above
      fifty shillings of our money, instead of a proportion almost four
      times as considerable, which was regularly imposed on their
      Gallic ancestors. The reason of this difference may be found, not
      so much in the relative scarcity or plenty of gold and silver, as
      in the different state of society, in ancient Gaul and in modern
      France. In a country where personal freedom is the privilege of
      every subject, the whole mass of taxes, whether they are levied
      on property or on consumption, may be fairly divided among the
      whole body of the nation. But the far greater part of the lands
      of ancient Gaul, as well as of the other provinces of the Roman
      world, were cultivated by slaves, or by peasants, whose dependent
      condition was a less rigid servitude. 183 In such a state the
      poor were maintained at the expense of the masters who enjoyed
      the fruits of their labor; and as the rolls of tribute were
      filled only with the names of those citizens who possessed the
      means of an honorable, or at least of a decent subsistence, the
      comparative smallness of their numbers explains and justifies the
      high rate of their capitation. The truth of this assertion may be
      illustrated by the following example: The Ædui, one of the most
      powerful and civilized tribes or _cities_ of Gaul, occupied an
      extent of territory, which now contains about five hundred
      thousand inhabitants, in the two ecclesiastical dioceses of Autun
      and Nevers; 184 and with the probable accession of those of
      Châlons and Maçon, 185 the population would amount to eight
      hundred thousand souls. In the time of Constantine, the territory
      of the Ædui afforded no more than twenty-five thousand _heads_ of
      capitation, of whom seven thousand were discharged by that prince
      from the intolerable weight of tribute. 186 A just analogy would
      seem to countenance the opinion of an ingenious historian, 187
      that the free and tributary citizens did not surpass the number
      of half a million; and if, in the ordinary administration of
      government, their annual payments may be computed at about four
      millions and a half of our money, it would appear, that although
      the share of each individual was four times as considerable, a
      fourth part only of the modern taxes of France was levied on the
      Imperial province of Gaul. The exactions of Constantius may be
      calculated at seven millions sterling, which were reduced to two
      millions by the humanity or the wisdom of Julian.


      18011 (return) [ Two masterly dissertations of M. Savigny, in the
      Mem. of the Berlin Academy (1822 and 1823) have thrown new light
      on the taxation system of the Empire. Gibbon, according to M.
      Savigny, is mistaken in supposing that there was but one kind of
      capitation tax; there was a land tax, and a capitation tax,
      strictly so called. The land tax was, in its operation, a
      proprietor’s or landlord’s tax. But, besides this, there was a
      direct capitation tax on all who were not possessed of landed
      property. This tax dates from the time of the Roman conquests;
      its amount is not clearly known. Gradual exemptions released
      different persons and classes from this tax. One edict exempts
      painters. In Syria, all under twelve or fourteen, or above
      sixty-five, were exempted; at a later period, all under twenty,
      and all unmarried females; still later, all under twenty-five,
      widows and nuns, soldiers, veterani and clerici—whole dioceses,
      that of Thrace and Illyricum. Under Galerius and Licinius, the
      plebs urbana became exempt; though this, perhaps, was only an
      ordinance for the East. By degrees, however, the exemption was
      extended to all the inhabitants of towns; and as it was strictly
      capitatio plebeia, from which all possessors were exempted it
      fell at length altogether on the coloni and agricultural slaves.
      These were registered in the same cataster (capitastrum) with the
      land tax. It was paid by the proprietor, who raised it again from
      his coloni and laborers.—M.]


      181 (return) [

    Geryones nos esse puta, monstrumque tributum, Hîc _capita_ ut
    vivam, tu mihi tolle _tria_. Sidon. Apollinar. Carm. xiii.

      The reputation of Father Sirmond led me to expect more
      satisfaction than I have found in his note (p. 144) on this
      remarkable passage. The words, suo vel _suorum_ nomine, betray
      the perplexity of the commentator.]


      182 (return) [ This assertion, however formidable it may seem, is
      founded on the original registers of births, deaths, and
      marriages, collected by public authority, and now deposited in
      the _Contrôlee General_ at Paris. The annual average of births
      throughout the whole kingdom, taken in five years, (from 1770 to
      1774, both inclusive,) is 479,649 boys, and 449,269 girls, in all
      928,918 children. The province of French Hainault alone furnishes
      9906 births; and we are assured, by an actual enumeration of the
      people, annually repeated from the year 1773 to the year 1776,
      that upon an average, Hainault contains 257,097 inhabitants. By
      the rules of fair analogy, we might infer, that the ordinary
      proportion of annual births to the whole people, is about 1 to
      26; and that the kingdom of France contains 24,151,868 persons of
      both sexes and of every age. If we content ourselves with the
      more moderate proportion of 1 to 25, the whole population will
      amount to 23,222,950. From the diligent researches of the French
      Government, (which are not unworthy of our own imitation,) we may
      hope to obtain a still greater degree of certainty on this
      important subject * Note: On no subject has so much valuable
      information been collected since the time of Gibbon, as the
      statistics of the different countries of Europe but much is still
      wanting as to our own—M.]


      183 (return) [ Cod. Theod. l. v. tit. ix. x. xi. Cod. Justinian.
      l. xi. tit. lxiii. Coloni appellantur qui conditionem debent
      genitali solo, propter agriculturum sub dominio possessorum.
      Augustin. de Civitate Dei, l. x. c. i.]


      184 (return) [ The ancient jurisdiction of (_Augustodunum_) Autun
      in Burgundy, the capital of the Ædui, comprehended the adjacent
      territory of (_Noviodunum_) Nevers. See D’Anville, Notice de
      l’Ancienne Gaule, p. 491. The two dioceses of Autun and Nevers
      are now composed, the former of 610, and the latter of 160
      parishes. The registers of births, taken during eleven years, in
      476 parishes of the same province of Burgundy, and multiplied by
      the moderate proportion of 25, (see Messance Recherches sur la
      Population, p. 142,) may authorizes us to assign an average
      number of 656 persons for each parish, which being again
      multiplied by the 770 parishes of the dioceses of Nevers and
      Autun, will produce the sum of 505,120 persons for the extent of
      country which was once possessed by the Ædui.]


      185 (return) [ We might derive an additional supply of 301,750
      inhabitants from the dioceses of Châlons (_Cabillonum_) and of
      Maçon, (_Matisco_,) since they contain, the one 200, and the
      other 260 parishes. This accession of territory might be
      justified by very specious reasons. 1. Châlons and Maçon were
      undoubtedly within the original jurisdiction of the Ædui. (See
      D’Anville, Notice, p. 187, 443.) 2. In the Notitia of Gaul, they
      are enumerated not as _Civitates_, but merely as _Castra_. 3.
      They do not appear to have been episcopal seats before the fifth
      and sixth centuries. Yet there is a passage in Eumenius (Panegyr.
      Vet. viii. 7) which very forcibly deters me from extending the
      territory of the Ædui, in the reign of Constantine, along the
      beautiful banks of the navigable Saône. * Note: In this passage
      of Eumenius, Savigny supposes the original number to have been
      32,000: 7000 being discharged, there remained 25,000 liable to
      the tribute. See Mem. quoted above.—M.]


      186 (return) [ Eumenius in Panegyr Vet. viii. 11.]


      187 (return) [ L’Abbé du Bos, Hist. Critique de la M. F. tom. i.
      p. 121]


      But this tax, or capitation, on the proprietors of land, would
      have suffered a rich and numerous class of free citizens to
      escape. With the view of sharing that species of wealth which is
      derived from art or labor, and which exists in money or in
      merchandise, the emperors imposed a distinct and personal tribute
      on the trading part of their subjects. 188 Some exemptions, very
      strictly confined both in time and place, were allowed to the
      proprietors who disposed of the produce of their own estates.
      Some indulgence was granted to the profession of the liberal
      arts: but every other branch of commercial industry was affected
      by the severity of the law. The honorable merchant of Alexandria,
      who imported the gems and spices of India for the use of the
      western world; the usurer, who derived from the interest of money
      a silent and ignominious profit; the ingenious manufacturer, the
      diligent mechanic, and even the most obscure retailer of a
      sequestered village, were obliged to admit the officers of the
      revenue into the partnership of their gain; and the sovereign of
      the Roman empire, who tolerated the profession, consented to
      share the infamous salary, of public prostitutes. 18811 As this
      general tax upon industry was collected every fourth year, it was
      styled the _Lustral Contribution:_ and the historian Zosimus 189
      laments that the approach of the fatal period was announced by
      the tears and terrors of the citizens, who were often compelled
      by the impending scourge to embrace the most abhorred and
      unnatural methods of procuring the sum at which their property
      had been assessed. The testimony of Zosimus cannot indeed be
      justified from the charge of passion and prejudice; but, from the
      nature of this tribute it seems reasonable to conclude, that it
      was arbitrary in the distribution, and extremely rigorous in the
      mode of collecting. The secret wealth of commerce, and the
      precarious profits of art or labor, are susceptible only of a
      discretionary valuation, which is seldom disadvantageous to the
      interest of the treasury; and as the person of the trader
      supplies the want of a visible and permanent security, the
      payment of the imposition, which, in the case of a land tax, may
      be obtained by the seizure of property, can rarely be extorted by
      any other means than those of corporal punishments. The cruel
      treatment of the insolvent debtors of the state, is attested, and
      was perhaps mitigated by a very humane edict of Constantine, who,
      disclaiming the use of racks and of scourges, allots a spacious
      and airy prison for the place of their confinement. 190


      188 (return) [ See Cod. Theod. l. xiii. tit. i. and iv.]


      18811 (return) [ The emperor Theodosius put an end, by a law. to
      this disgraceful source of revenue. (Godef. ad Cod. Theod. xiii.
      tit. i. c. 1.) But before he deprived himself of it, he made sure
      of some way of replacing this deficit. A rich patrician,
      Florentius, indignant at this legalized licentiousness, had made
      representations on the subject to the emperor. To induce him to
      tolerate it no longer, he offered his own property to supply the
      diminution of the revenue. The emperor had the baseness to accept
      his offer—G.]


      189 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 115. There is probably as much
      passion and prejudice in the attack of Zosimus, as in the
      elaborate defence of the memory of Constantine by the zealous Dr.
      Howell. Hist. of the World, vol. ii. p. 20.]


      190 (return) [ Cod. Theod. l. xi. tit vii. leg. 3.]


      These general taxes were imposed and levied by the absolute
      authority of the monarch; but the occasional offerings of the
      _coronary gold_ still retained the name and semblance of popular
      consent. It was an ancient custom that the allies of the
      republic, who ascribed their safety or deliverance to the success
      of the Roman arms, and even the cities of Italy, who admired the
      virtues of their victorious general, adorned the pomp of his
      triumph by their voluntary gifts of crowns of gold, which after
      the ceremony were consecrated in the temple of Jupiter, to remain
      a lasting monument of his glory to future ages. The progress of
      zeal and flattery soon multiplied the number, and increased the
      size, of these popular donations; and the triumph of Cæsar was
      enriched with two thousand eight hundred and twenty-two massy
      crowns, whose weight amounted to twenty thousand four hundred and
      fourteen pounds of gold. This treasure was immediately melted
      down by the prudent dictator, who was satisfied that it would be
      more serviceable to his soldiers than to the gods: his example
      was imitated by his successors; and the custom was introduced of
      exchanging these splendid ornaments for the more acceptable
      present of the current gold coin of the empire. 191 The
      spontaneous offering was at length exacted as the debt of duty;
      and instead of being confined to the occasion of a triumph, it
      was supposed to be granted by the several cities and provinces of
      the monarchy, as often as the emperor condescended to announce
      his accession, his consulship, the birth of a son, the creation
      of a Cæsar, a victory over the Barbarians, or any other real or
      imaginary event which graced the annals of his reign. The
      peculiar free gift of the senate of Rome was fixed by custom at
      sixteen hundred pounds of gold, or about sixty-four thousand
      pounds sterling. The oppressed subjects celebrated their own
      felicity, that their sovereign should graciously consent to
      accept this feeble but voluntary testimony of their loyalty and
      gratitude. 192


      191 (return) [ See Lipsius de Magnitud. Romana, l. ii. c. 9. The
      Tarragonese Spain presented the emperor Claudius with a crown of
      gold of seven, and Gaul with another of nine, _hundred_ pounds
      weight. I have followed the rational emendation of Lipsius. *
      Note: This custom is of still earlier date, the Romans had
      borrowed it from Greece. Who is not acquainted with the famous
      oration of Demosthenes for the golden crown, which his citizens
      wished to bestow, and Æschines to deprive him of?—G.]


      192 (return) [ Cod. Theod. l. xii. tit. xiii. The senators were
      supposed to be exempt from the _Aurum Coronarium;_ but the _Auri
      Oblatio_, which was required at their hands, was precisely of the
      same nature.]


      A people elated by pride, or soured by discontent, are seldom
      qualified to form a just estimate of their actual situation. The
      subjects of Constantine were incapable of discerning the decline
      of genius and manly virtue, which so far degraded them below the
      dignity of their ancestors; but they could feel and lament the
      rage of tyranny, the relaxation of discipline, and the increase
      of taxes. The impartial historian, who acknowledges the justice
      of their complaints, will observe some favorable circumstances
      which tended to alleviate the misery of their condition. The
      threatening tempest of Barbarians, which so soon subverted the
      foundations of Roman greatness, was still repelled, or suspended,
      on the frontiers. The arts of luxury and literature were
      cultivated, and the elegant pleasures of society were enjoyed, by
      the inhabitants of a considerable portion of the globe. The
      forms, the pomp, and the expense of the civil administration
      contributed to restrain the irregular license of the soldiers;
      and although the laws were violated by power, or perverted by
      subtlety, the sage principles of the Roman jurisprudence
      preserved a sense of order and equity, unknown to the despotic
      governments of the East. The rights of mankind might derive some
      protection from religion and philosophy; and the name of freedom,
      which could no longer alarm, might sometimes admonish, the
      successors of Augustus, that they did not reign over a nation of
      Slaves or Barbarians. 193


      193 (return) [ The great Theodosius, in his judicious advice to
      his son, (Claudian in iv. Consulat. Honorii, 214, &c.,)
      distinguishes the station of a Roman prince from that of a
      Parthian monarch. Virtue was necessary for the one; birth might
      suffice for the other.]
