Chapter VI: Death Of Severus, Tyranny Of Caracalla, Usurpation Of
      Marcinus.—Part I.


The Death Of Severus.—Tyranny Of Caracalla.—Usurpation Of
Macrinus.—Follies Of Elagabalus.—Virtues Of Alexander
Severus.—Licentiousness Of The Army.—General State Of The Roman
Finances.


      The ascent to greatness, however steep and dangerous, may
      entertain an active spirit with the consciousness and exercise of
      its own powers: but the possession of a throne could never yet
      afford a lasting satisfaction to an ambitious mind. This
      melancholy truth was felt and acknowledged by Severus. Fortune
      and merit had, from an humble station, elevated him to the first
      place among mankind. “He had been all things,” as he said
      himself, “and all was of little value.” 1 Distracted with the
      care, not of acquiring, but of preserving an empire, oppressed
      with age and infirmities, careless of fame, 2 and satiated with
      power, all his prospects of life were closed. The desire of
      perpetuating the greatness of his family was the only remaining
      wish of his ambition and paternal tenderness.


      1 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 71. “Omnia fui, et nihil expedit.”]


      2 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxxvi. p. 1284.]


      Like most of the Africans, Severus was passionately addicted to
      the vain studies of magic and divination, deeply versed in the
      interpretation of dreams and omens, and perfectly acquainted with
      the science of judicial astrology; which, in almost every age
      except the present, has maintained its dominion over the mind of
      man. He had lost his first wife, while he was governor of the
      Lionnese Gaul. 3 In the choice of a second, he sought only to
      connect himself with some favorite of fortune; and as soon as he
      had discovered that the young lady of Emesa in Syria had _a royal
      nativity_, he solicited and obtained her hand. 4 Julia Domna (for
      that was her name) deserved all that the stars could promise her.


      She possessed, even in advanced age, the attractions of beauty, 5
      and united to a lively imagination a firmness of mind, and
      strength of judgment, seldom bestowed on her sex. Her amiable
      qualities never made any deep impression on the dark and jealous
      temper of her husband; but in her son’s reign, she administered
      the principal affairs of the empire, with a prudence that
      supported his authority, and with a moderation that sometimes
      corrected his wild extravagancies. 6 Julia applied herself to
      letters and philosophy, with some success, and with the most
      splendid reputation. She was the patroness of every art, and the
      friend of every man of genius. 7 The grateful flattery of the
      learned has celebrated her virtues; but, if we may credit the
      scandal of ancient history, chastity was very far from being the
      most conspicuous virtue of the empress Julia. 8


      3 (return) [ About the year 186. M. de Tillemont is miserably
      embarrassed with a passage of Dion, in which the empress
      Faustina, who died in the year 175, is introduced as having
      contributed to the marriage of Severus and Julia, (l. lxxiv. p.
      1243.) The learned compiler forgot that Dion is relating not a
      real fact, but a dream of Severus; and dreams are circumscribed
      to no limits of time or space. Did M. de Tillemont imagine that
      marriages were consummated in the temple of Venus at Rome? Hist.
      des Empereurs, tom. iii. p. 389. Note 6.]


      4 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 65.]


      5 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 5.]


      6 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxxvii. p. 1304, 1314.]


      7 (return) [ See a dissertation of Menage, at the end of his
      edition of Diogenes Lærtius, de Fœminis Philosophis.]


      8 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1285. Aurelius Victor.]


      Two sons, Caracalla 9 and Geta, were the fruit of this marriage,
      and the destined heirs of the empire. The fond hopes of the
      father, and of the Roman world, were soon disappointed by these
      vain youths, who displayed the indolent security of hereditary
      princes; and a presumption that fortune would supply the place of
      merit and application. Without any emulation of virtue or
      talents, they discovered, almost from their infancy, a fixed and
      implacable antipathy for each other.


      9 (return) [ Bassianus was his first name, as it had been that of
      his maternal grandfather. During his reign, he assumed the
      appellation of Antoninus, which is employed by lawyers and
      ancient historians. After his death, the public indignation
      loaded him with the nicknames of Tarantus and Caracalla. The
      first was borrowed from a celebrated Gladiator, the second from a
      long Gallic gown which he distributed to the people of Rome.]


      Their aversion, confirmed by years, and fomented by the arts of
      their interested favorites, broke out in childish, and gradually
      in more serious competitions; and, at length, divided the
      theatre, the circus, and the court, into two factions, actuated
      by the hopes and fears of their respective leaders. The prudent
      emperor endeavored, by every expedient of advice and authority,
      to allay this growing animosity. The unhappy discord of his sons
      clouded all his prospects, and threatened to overturn a throne
      raised with so much labor, cemented with so much blood, and
      guarded with every defence of arms and treasure. With an
      impartial hand he maintained between them an exact balance of
      favor, conferred on both the rank of Augustus, with the revered
      name of Antoninus; and for the first time the Roman world beheld
      three emperors. 10 Yet even this equal conduct served only to
      inflame the contest, whilst the fierce Caracalla asserted the
      right of primogeniture, and the milder Geta courted the
      affections of the people and the soldiers. In the anguish of a
      disappointed father, Severus foretold that the weaker of his sons
      would fall a sacrifice to the stronger; who, in his turn, would
      be ruined by his own vices. 11


      10 (return) [ The elevation of Caracalla is fixed by the accurate
      M. de Tillemont to the year 198; the association of Geta to the
      year 208.]


      11 (return) [ Herodian, l. iii. p. 130. The lives of Caracalla
      and Geta, in the Augustan History.]


      In these circumstances the intelligence of a war in Britain, and
      of an invasion of the province by the barbarians of the North,
      was received with pleasure by Severus. Though the vigilance of
      his lieutenants might have been sufficient to repel the distant
      enemy, he resolved to embrace the honorable pretext of
      withdrawing his sons from the luxury of Rome, which enervated
      their minds and irritated their passions; and of inuring their
      youth to the toils of war and government. Notwithstanding his
      advanced age, (for he was above threescore,) and his gout, which
      obliged him to be carried in a litter, he transported himself in
      person into that remote island, attended by his two sons, his
      whole court, and a formidable army. He immediately passed the
      walls of Hadrian and Antoninus, and entered the enemy’s country,
      with a design of completing the long attempted conquest of
      Britain. He penetrated to the northern extremity of the island,
      without meeting an enemy. But the concealed ambuscades of the
      Caledonians, who hung unseen on the rear and flanks of his army,
      the coldness of the climate and the severity of a winter march
      across the hills and morasses of Scotland, are reported to have
      cost the Romans above fifty thousand men. The Caledonians at
      length yielded to the powerful and obstinate attack, sued for
      peace, and surrendered a part of their arms, and a large tract of
      territory. But their apparent submission lasted no longer than
      the present terror. As soon as the Roman legions had retired,
      they resumed their hostile independence. Their restless spirit
      provoked Severus to send a new army into Caledonia, with the most
      bloody orders, not to subdue, but to extirpate the natives. They
      were saved by the death of their haughty enemy. 12


      12 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1280, &c. Herodian, l. iii. p.
      132, &c.]


      This Caledonian war, neither marked by decisive events, nor
      attended with any important consequences, would ill deserve our
      attention; but it is supposed, not without a considerable degree
      of probability, that the invasion of Severus is connected with
      the most shining period of the British history or fable. Fingal,
      whose fame, with that of his heroes and bards, has been revived
      in our language by a recent publication, is said to have
      commanded the Caledonians in that memorable juncture, to have
      eluded the power of Severus, and to have obtained a signal
      victory on the banks of the Carun, in which the son of _the King
      of the World_, Caracul, fled from his arms along the fields of
      his pride. 13 Something of a doubtful mist still hangs over these
      Highland traditions; nor can it be entirely dispelled by the most
      ingenious researches of modern criticism; 14 but if we could,
      with safety, indulge the pleasing supposition, that Fingal lived,
      and that Ossian sung, the striking contrast of the situation and
      manners of the contending nations might amuse a philosophic mind.


      The parallel would be little to the advantage of the more
      civilized people, if we compared the unrelenting revenge of
      Severus with the generous clemency of Fingal; the timid and
      brutal cruelty of Caracalla with the bravery, the tenderness, the
      elegant genius of Ossian; the mercenary chiefs, who, from motives
      of fear or interest, served under the imperial standard, with the
      free-born warriors who started to arms at the voice of the king
      of Morven; if, in a word, we contemplated the untutored
      Caledonians, glowing with the warm virtues of nature, and the
      degenerate Romans, polluted with the mean vices of wealth and
      slavery.


      13 (return) [ Ossian’s Poems, vol. i. p. 175.]


      14 (return) [ That the Caracul of Ossian is the Caracalla of the
      Roman History, is, perhaps, the only point of British antiquity
      in which Mr. Macpherson and Mr. Whitaker are of the same opinion;
      and yet the opinion is not without difficulty. In the Caledonian
      war, the son of Severus was known only by the appellation of
      Antoninus, and it may seem strange that the Highland bard should
      describe him by a nickname, invented four years afterwards,
      scarcely used by the Romans till after the death of that emperor,
      and seldom employed by the most ancient historians. See Dion, l.
      lxxvii. p. 1317. Hist. August. p. 89 Aurel. Victor. Euseb. in
      Chron. ad ann. 214. Note: The historical authority of
      Macpherson’s Ossian has not increased since Gibbon wrote. We may,
      indeed, consider it exploded. Mr. Whitaker, in a letter to Gibbon
      (Misc. Works, vol. ii. p. 100,) attempts, not very successfully,
      to weaken this objection of the historian.—M.]


      The declining health and last illness of Severus inflamed the
      wild ambition and black passions of Caracalla’s soul. Impatient
      of any delay or division of empire, he attempted, more than once,
      to shorten the small remainder of his father’s days, and
      endeavored, but without success, to excite a mutiny among the
      troops. 15 The old emperor had often censured the misguided
      lenity of Marcus, who, by a single act of justice, might have
      saved the Romans from the tyranny of his worthless son. Placed in
      the same situation, he experienced how easily the rigor of a
      judge dissolves away in the tenderness of a parent. He
      deliberated, he threatened, but he could not punish; and this
      last and only instance of mercy was more fatal to the empire than
      a long series of cruelty. 16 The disorder of his mind irritated
      the pains of his body; he wished impatiently for death, and
      hastened the instant of it by his impatience. He expired at York
      in the sixty-fifth year of his life, and in the eighteenth of a
      glorious and successful reign. In his last moments he recommended
      concord to his sons, and his sons to the army. The salutary
      advice never reached the heart, or even the understanding, of the
      impetuous youths; but the more obedient troops, mindful of their
      oath of allegiance, and of the authority of their deceased
      master, resisted the solicitations of Caracalla, and proclaimed
      both brothers emperors of Rome. The new princes soon left the
      Caledonians in peace, returned to the capital, celebrated their
      father’s funeral with divine honors, and were cheerfully
      acknowledged as lawful sovereigns, by the senate, the people, and
      the provinces. Some preeminence of rank seems to have been
      allowed to the elder brother; but they both administered the
      empire with equal and independent power. 17


      15 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1282. Hist. August. p. 71.
      Aurel. Victor.]


      16 (return) [Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1283. Hist. August. p. 89]


      17 (return) [Footnote 17: Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1284. Herodian, l.
      iii. p. 135.]


      Such a divided form of government would have proved a source of
      discord between the most affectionate brothers. It was impossible
      that it could long subsist between two implacable enemies, who
      neither desired nor could trust a reconciliation. It was visible
      that one only could reign, and that the other must fall; and each
      of them, judging of his rival’s designs by his own, guarded his
      life with the most jealous vigilance from the repeated attacks of
      poison or the sword. Their rapid journey through Gaul and Italy,
      during which they never ate at the same table, or slept in the
      same house, displayed to the provinces the odious spectacle of
      fraternal discord. On their arrival at Rome, they immediately
      divided the vast extent of the imperial palace. 18 No
      communication was allowed between their apartments; the doors and
      passages were diligently fortified, and guards posted and
      relieved with the same strictness as in a besieged place. The
      emperors met only in public, in the presence of their afflicted
      mother; and each surrounded by a numerous train of armed
      followers. Even on these occasions of ceremony, the dissimulation
      of courts could ill disguise the rancor of their hearts. 19


      18 (return) [ Mr. Hume is justly surprised at a passage of
      Herodian, (l. iv. p. 139,) who, on this occasion, represents the
      Imperial palace as equal in extent to the rest of Rome. The whole
      region of the Palatine Mount, on which it was built, occupied, at
      most, a circumference of eleven or twelve thousand feet, (see the
      Notitia and Victor, in Nardini’s Roma Antica.) But we should
      recollect that the opulent senators had almost surrounded the
      city with their extensive gardens and suburb palaces, the
      greatest part of which had been gradually confiscated by the
      emperors. If Geta resided in the gardens that bore his name on
      the Janiculum, and if Caracalla inhabited the gardens of Mæcenas
      on the Esquiline, the rival brothers were separated from each
      other by the distance of several miles; and yet the intermediate
      space was filled by the Imperial gardens of Sallust, of Lucullus,
      of Agrippa, of Domitian, of Caius, &c., all skirting round the
      city, and all connected with each other, and with the palace, by
      bridges thrown over the Tiber and the streets. But this
      explanation of Herodian would require, though it ill deserves, a
      particular dissertation, illustrated by a map of ancient Rome.
      (Hume, Essay on Populousness of Ancient Nations.—M.)]


      19 (return) [ Herodian, l. iv. p. 139]


      This latent civil war already distracted the whole government,
      when a scheme was suggested that seemed of mutual benefit to the
      hostile brothers. It was proposed, that since it was impossible
      to reconcile their minds, they should separate their interest,
      and divide the empire between them. The conditions of the treaty
      were already drawn with some accuracy. It was agreed that
      Caracalla, as the elder brother should remain in possession of
      Europe and the western Africa; and that he should relinquish the
      sovereignty of Asia and Egypt to Geta, who might fix his
      residence at Alexandria or Antioch, cities little inferior to
      Rome itself in wealth and greatness; that numerous armies should
      be constantly encamped on either side of the Thracian Bosphorus,
      to guard the frontiers of the rival monarchies; and that the
      senators of European extraction should acknowledge the sovereign
      of Rome, whilst the natives of Asia followed the emperor of the
      East. The tears of the empress Julia interrupted the negotiation,
      the first idea of which had filled every Roman breast with
      surprise and indignation. The mighty mass of conquest was so
      intimately united by the hand of time and policy, that it
      required the most forcible violence to rend it asunder. The
      Romans had reason to dread, that the disjointed members would
      soon be reduced by a civil war under the dominion of one master;
      but if the separation was permanent, the division of the
      provinces must terminate in the dissolution of an empire whose
      unity had hitherto remained inviolate. 20


      20 (return) [ Herodian, l. iv. p. 144.]


      Had the treaty been carried into execution, the sovereign of
      Europe might soon have been the conqueror of Asia; but Caracalla
      obtained an easier, though a more guilty, victory. He artfully
      listened to his mother’s entreaties, and consented to meet his
      brother in her apartment, on terms of peace and reconciliation.
      In the midst of their conversation, some centurions, who had
      contrived to conceal themselves, rushed with drawn swords upon
      the unfortunate Geta. His distracted mother strove to protect him
      in her arms; but, in the unavailing struggle, she was wounded in
      the hand, and covered with the blood of her younger son, while
      she saw the elder animating and assisting 21 the fury of the
      assassins. As soon as the deed was perpetrated, Caracalla, with
      hasty steps, and horror in his countenance, ran towards the
      Prætorian camp, as his only refuge, and threw himself on the
      ground before the statues of the tutelar deities. 22 The soldiers
      attempted to raise and comfort him. In broken and disordered
      words he informed them of his imminent danger, and fortunate
      escape; insinuating that he had prevented the designs of his
      enemy, and declared his resolution to live and die with his
      faithful troops. Geta had been the favorite of the soldiers; but
      complaint was useless, revenge was dangerous, and they still
      reverenced the son of Severus. Their discontent died away in idle
      murmurs, and Caracalla soon convinced them of the justice of his
      cause, by distributing in one lavish donative the accumulated
      treasures of his father’s reign. 23 The real _sentiments_ of the
      soldiers alone were of importance to his power or safety. Their
      declaration in his favor commanded the dutiful _professions_ of
      the senate. The obsequious assembly was always prepared to ratify
      the decision of fortune; 231 but as Caracalla wished to assuage
      the first emotions of public indignation, the name of Geta was
      mentioned with decency, and he received the funeral honors of a
      Roman emperor. 24 Posterity, in pity to his misfortune, has cast
      a veil over his vices. We consider that young prince as the
      innocent victim of his brother’s ambition, without recollecting
      that he himself wanted power, rather than inclination, to
      consummate the same attempts of revenge and murder. 241


      21 (return) [ Caracalla consecrated, in the temple of Serapis,
      the sword with which, as he boasted, he had slain his brother
      Geta. Dion, l. lxxvii p. 1307.]


      22 (return) [ Herodian, l. iv. p. 147. In every Roman camp there
      was a small chapel near the head-quarters, in which the statues
      of the tutelar deities were preserved and adored; and we may
      remark that the eagles, and other military ensigns, were in the
      first rank of these deities; an excellent institution, which
      confirmed discipline by the sanction of religion. See Lipsius de
      Militia Romana, iv. 5, v. 2.]


      23 (return) [ Herodian, l. iv. p. 148. Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1289.]


      231 (return) [ The account of this transaction, in a new passage
      of Dion, varies in some degree from this statement. It adds that
      the next morning, in the senate, Antoninus requested their
      indulgence, not because he had killed his brother, but because he
      was hoarse, and could not address them. Mai. Fragm. p. 228.—M.]


      24 (return) [ Geta was placed among the gods. Sit divus, dum non
      sit vivus said his brother. Hist. August. p. 91. Some marks of
      Geta’s consecration are still found upon medals.]


      241 (return) [ The favorable judgment which history has given of
      Geta is not founded solely on a feeling of pity; it is supported
      by the testimony of contemporary historians: he was too fond of
      the pleasures of the table, and showed great mistrust of his
      brother; but he was humane, well instructed; he often endeavored
      to mitigate the rigorous decrees of Severus and Caracalla. Herod
      iv. 3. Spartian in Geta.—W.]


      The crime went not unpunished. Neither business, nor pleasure,
      nor flattery, could defend Caracalla from the stings of a guilty
      conscience; and he confessed, in the anguish of a tortured mind,
      that his disordered fancy often beheld the angry forms of his
      father and his brother rising into life, to threaten and upbraid
      him. 25 The consciousness of his crime should have induced him to
      convince mankind, by the virtues of his reign, that the bloody
      deed had been the involuntary effect of fatal necessity. But the
      repentance of Caracalla only prompted him to remove from the
      world whatever could remind him of his guilt, or recall the
      memory of his murdered brother. On his return from the senate to
      the palace, he found his mother in the company of several noble
      matrons, weeping over the untimely fate of her younger son. The
      jealous emperor threatened them with instant death; the sentence
      was executed against Fadilla, the last remaining daughter of the
      emperor Marcus; 251 and even the afflicted Julia was obliged to
      silence her lamentations, to suppress her sighs, and to receive
      the assassin with smiles of joy and approbation. It was computed
      that, under the vague appellation of the friends of Geta, above
      twenty thousand persons of both sexes suffered death. His guards
      and freedmen, the ministers of his serious business, and the
      companions of his looser hours, those who by his interest had
      been promoted to any commands in the army or provinces, with the
      long connected chain of their dependants, were included in the
      proscription; which endeavored to reach every one who had
      maintained the smallest correspondence with Geta, who lamented
      his death, or who even mentioned his name. 26 Helvius Pertinax,
      son to the prince of that name, lost his life by an unseasonable
      witticism. 27 It was a sufficient crime of Thrasea Priscus to be
      descended from a family in which the love of liberty seemed an
      hereditary quality. 28 The particular causes of calumny and
      suspicion were at length exhausted; and when a senator was
      accused of being a secret enemy to the government, the emperor
      was satisfied with the general proof that he was a man of
      property and virtue. From this well-grounded principle he
      frequently drew the most bloody inferences. 281


      25 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1307]


      251 (return) [ The most valuable paragraph of dion, which the
      industry of M. Manas recovered, relates to this daughter of
      Marcus, executed by Caracalla. Her name, as appears from Fronto,
      as well as from Dion, was Cornificia. When commanded to choose
      the kind of death she was to suffer, she burst into womanish
      tears; but remembering her father Marcus, she thus spoke:—“O my
      hapless soul, (... animula,) now imprisoned in the body, burst
      forth! be free! show them, however reluctant to believe it, that
      thou art the daughter of Marcus.” She then laid aside all her
      ornaments, and preparing herself for death, ordered her veins to
      be opened. Mai. Fragm. Vatican ii p. 220.—M.]


      26 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1290. Herodian, l. iv. p. 150.
      Dion (p. 2298) says, that the comic poets no longer durst employ
      the name of Geta in their plays, and that the estates of those
      who mentioned it in their testaments were confiscated.]


      27 (return) [ Caracalla had assumed the names of several
      conquered nations; Pertinax observed, that the name of Geticus
      (he had obtained some advantage over the Goths, or Getæ) would be
      a proper addition to Parthieus, Alemannicus, &c. Hist. August. p.
      89.]


      28 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1291. He was probably descended
      from Helvidius Priscus, and Thrasea Pætus, those patriots, whose
      firm, but useless and unseasonable, virtue has been immortalized
      by Tacitus. Note: M. Guizot is indignant at this “cold”
      observation of Gibbon on the noble character of Thrasea; but he
      admits that his virtue was useless to the public, and
      unseasonable amidst the vices of his age.—M.]


      281 (return) [ Caracalla reproached all those who demanded no
      favors of him. “It is clear that if you make me no requests, you
      do not trust me; if you do not trust me, you suspect me; if you
      suspect me, you fear me; if you fear me, you hate me.” And
      forthwith he condemned them as conspirators, a good specimen of
      the sorites in a tyrant’s logic. See Fragm. Vatican p.—M.]


      Chapter VI: Death Of Severus, Tyranny Of Caracalla, Usurpation Of
      Marcinus.—Part II.


      The execution of so many innocent citizens was bewailed by the
      secret tears of their friends and families. The death of
      Papinian, the Prætorian Præfect, was lamented as a public
      calamity. 282 During the last seven years of Severus, he had
      exercised the most important offices of the state, and, by his
      salutary influence, guided the emperor’s steps in the paths of
      justice and moderation. In full assurance of his virtue and
      abilities, Severus, on his death-bed, had conjured him to watch
      over the prosperity and union of the Imperial family. 29 The
      honest labors of Papinian served only to inflame the hatred which
      Caracalla had already conceived against his father’s minister.
      After the murder of Geta, the Præfect was commanded to exert the
      powers of his skill and eloquence in a studied apology for that
      atrocious deed. The philosophic Seneca had condescended to
      compose a similar epistle to the senate, in the name of the son
      and assassin of Agrippina. 30 “That it was easier to commit than
      to justify a parricide,” was the glorious reply of Papinian; 31
      who did not hesitate between the loss of life and that of honor.
      Such intrepid virtue, which had escaped pure and unsullied from
      the intrigues of courts, the habits of business, and the arts of
      his profession, reflects more lustre on the memory of Papinian,
      than all his great employments, his numerous writings, and the
      superior reputation as a lawyer, which he has preserved through
      every age of the Roman jurisprudence. 32


      282 (return) [ Papinian was no longer Prætorian Præfect.
      Caracalla had deprived him of that office immediately after the
      death of Severus. Such is the statement of Dion; and the
      testimony of Spartian, who gives Papinian the Prætorian
      præfecture till his death, is of little weight opposed to that of
      a senator then living at Rome.—W.]


      29 (return) [ It is said that Papinian was himself a relation of
      the empress Julia.]


      30 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xiv. 2.]


      31 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 88.]


      32 (return) [ With regard to Papinian, see Heineccius’s Historia
      Juris Roma ni, l. 330, &c.]


      It had hitherto been the peculiar felicity of the Romans, and in
      the worst of times the consolation, that the virtue of the
      emperors was active, and their vice indolent. Augustus, Trajan,
      Hadrian, and Marcus visited their extensive dominions in person,
      and their progress was marked by acts of wisdom and beneficence.
      The tyranny of Tiberius, Nero, and Domitian, who resided almost
      constantly at Rome, or in the adjacent was confined to the
      senatorial and equestrian orders. 33 But Caracalla was the common
      enemy of mankind. He left the capital (and he never returned to
      it) about a year after the murder of Geta. The rest of his reign
      was spent in the several provinces of the empire, particularly
      those of the East, and every province was by turns the scene of
      his rapine and cruelty. The senators, compelled by fear to attend
      his capricious motions, were obliged to provide daily
      entertainments at an immense expense, which he abandoned with
      contempt to his guards; and to erect, in every city, magnificent
      palaces and theatres, which he either disdained to visit, or
      ordered immediately thrown down. The most wealthy families were
      ruined by partial fines and confiscations, and the great body of
      his subjects oppressed by ingenious and aggravated taxes. 34 In
      the midst of peace, and upon the slightest provocation, he issued
      his commands, at Alexandria, in Egypt for a general massacre.
      From a secure post in the temple of Serapis, he viewed and
      directed the slaughter of many thousand citizens, as well as
      strangers, without distinguishing the number or the crime of the
      sufferers; since as he coolly informed the senate, _all_ the
      Alexandrians, those who had perished, and those who had escaped,
      were alike guilty. 35


      33 (return) [ Tiberius and Domitian never moved from the
      neighborhood of Rome. Nero made a short journey into Greece. “Et
      laudatorum Principum usus ex æquo, quamvis procul agentibus. Sævi
      proximis ingruunt.” Tacit. Hist. iv. 74.]


      34 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1294.]


      35 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1307. Herodian, l. iv. p. 158.
      The former represents it as a cruel massacre, the latter as a
      perfidious one too. It seems probable that the Alexandrians has
      irritated the tyrant by their railleries, and perhaps by their
      tumults. * Note: After these massacres, Caracalla also deprived
      the Alexandrians of their spectacles and public feasts; he
      divided the city into two parts by a wall with towers at
      intervals, to prevent the peaceful communications of the
      citizens. Thus was treated the unhappy Alexandria, says Dion, by
      the savage beast of Ausonia. This, in fact, was the epithet which
      the oracle had applied to him; it is said, indeed, that he was
      much pleased with the name and often boasted of it. Dion, lxxvii.
      p. 1307.—G.]


      The wise instructions of Severus never made any lasting
      impression on the mind of his son, who, although not destitute of
      imagination and eloquence, was equally devoid of judgment and
      humanity. 36 One dangerous maxim, worthy of a tyrant, was
      remembered and abused by Caracalla. “To secure the affections of
      the army, and to esteem the rest of his subjects as of little
      moment.” 37 But the liberality of the father had been restrained
      by prudence, and his indulgence to the troops was tempered by
      firmness and authority. The careless profusion of the son was the
      policy of one reign, and the inevitable ruin both of the army and
      of the empire. The vigor of the soldiers, instead of being
      confirmed by the severe discipline of camps, melted away in the
      luxury of cities. The excessive increase of their pay and
      donatives 38 exhausted the state to enrich the military order,
      whose modesty in peace, and service in war, is best secured by an
      honorable poverty. The demeanor of Caracalla was haughty and full
      of pride; but with the troops he forgot even the proper dignity
      of his rank, encouraged their insolent familiarity, and,
      neglecting the essential duties of a general, affected to imitate
      the dress and manners of a common soldier.


      36 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1296.]


      37 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvi. p. 1284. Mr. Wotton (Hist. of Rome,
      p. 330) suspects that this maxim was invented by Caracalla
      himself, and attributed to his father.]


      38 (return) [ Dion (l. lxxviii. p. 1343) informs us that the
      extraordinary gifts of Caracalla to the army amounted annually to
      seventy millions of drachmæ (about two millions three hundred and
      fifty thousand pounds.) There is another passage in Dion,
      concerning the military pay, infinitely curious, were it not
      obscure, imperfect, and probably corrupt. The best sense seems to
      be, that the Prætorian guards received twelve hundred and fifty
      drachmæ, (forty pounds a year,) (Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1307.) Under
      the reign of Augustus, they were paid at the rate of two drachmæ,
      or denarii, per day, 720 a year, (Tacit. Annal. i. 17.) Domitian,
      who increased the soldiers’ pay one fourth, must have raised the
      Prætorians to 960 drachmæ, (Gronoviue de Pecunia Veteri, l. iii.
      c. 2.) These successive augmentations ruined the empire; for,
      with the soldiers’ pay, their numbers too were increased. We have
      seen the Prætorians alone increased from 10,000 to 50,000 men.
      Note: Valois and Reimar have explained in a very simple and
      probable manner this passage of Dion, which Gibbon seems to me
      not to have understood. He ordered that the soldiers should
      receive, as the reward of their services the Prætorians 1250
      drachms, the other 5000 drachms. Valois thinks that the numbers
      have been transposed, and that Caracalla added 5000 drachms to
      the donations made to the Prætorians, 1250 to those of the
      legionaries. The Prætorians, in fact, always received more than
      the others. The error of Gibbon arose from his considering that
      this referred to the annual pay of the soldiers, while it relates
      to the sum they received as a reward for their services on their
      discharge: donatives means recompense for service. Augustus had
      settled that the Prætorians, after sixteen campaigns, should
      receive 5000 drachms: the legionaries received only 3000 after
      twenty years. Caracalla added 5000 drachms to the donative of the
      Prætorians, 1250 to that of the legionaries. Gibbon appears to
      have been mistaken both in confounding this donative on discharge
      with the annual pay, and in not paying attention to the remark of
      Valois on the transposition of the numbers in the text.—G]


      It was impossible that such a character, and such conduct as that
      of Caracalla, could inspire either love or esteem; but as long as
      his vices were beneficial to the armies, he was secure from the
      danger of rebellion. A secret conspiracy, provoked by his own
      jealousy, was fatal to the tyrant. The Prætorian præfecture was
      divided between two ministers. The military department was
      intrusted to Adventus, an experienced rather than able soldier;
      and the civil affairs were transacted by Opilius Macrinus, who,
      by his dexterity in business, had raised himself, with a fair
      character, to that high office. But his favor varied with the
      caprice of the emperor, and his life might depend on the
      slightest suspicion, or the most casual circumstance. Malice or
      fanaticism had suggested to an African, deeply skilled in the
      knowledge of futurity, a very dangerous prediction, that Macrinus
      and his son were destined to reign over the empire. The report
      was soon diffused through the province; and when the man was sent
      in chains to Rome, he still asserted, in the presence of the
      præfect of the city, the faith of his prophecy. That magistrate,
      who had received the most pressing instructions to inform himself
      of the _successors_ of Caracalla, immediately communicated the
      examination of the African to the Imperial court, which at that
      time resided in Syria. But, notwithstanding the diligence of the
      public messengers, a friend of Macrinus found means to apprise
      him of the approaching danger. The emperor received the letters
      from Rome; and as he was then engaged in the conduct of a chariot
      race, he delivered them unopened to the Prætorian Præfect,
      directing him to despatch the ordinary affairs, and to report the
      more important business that might be contained in them. Macrinus
      read his fate, and resolved to prevent it. He inflamed the
      discontents of some inferior officers, and employed the hand of
      Martialis, a desperate soldier, who had been refused the rank of
      centurion. The devotion of Caracalla prompted him to make a
      pilgrimage from Edessa to the celebrated temple of the Moon at
      Carrhæ. 381 He was attended by a body of cavalry: but having
      stopped on the road for some necessary occasion, his guards
      preserved a respectful distance, and Martialis, approaching his
      person under a presence of duty, stabbed him with a dagger. The
      bold assassin was instantly killed by a Scythian archer of the
      Imperial guard. Such was the end of a monster whose life
      disgraced human nature, and whose reign accused the patience of
      the Romans. 39 The grateful soldiers forgot his vices, remembered
      only his partial liberality, and obliged the senate to prostitute
      their own dignity and that of religion, by granting him a place
      among the gods. Whilst he was upon earth, Alexander the Great was
      the only hero whom this god deemed worthy his admiration. He
      assumed the name and ensigns of Alexander, formed a Macedonian
      phalanx of guards, persecuted the disciples of Aristotle, and
      displayed, with a puerile enthusiasm, the only sentiment by which
      he discovered any regard for virtue or glory. We can easily
      conceive, that after the battle of Narva, and the conquest of
      Poland, Charles XII. (though he still wanted the more elegant
      accomplishments of the son of Philip) might boast of having
      rivalled his valor and magnanimity; but in no one action of his
      life did Caracalla express the faintest resemblance of the
      Macedonian hero, except in the murder of a great number of his
      own and of his father’s friends. 40


      381 (return) [ Carrhæ, now Harran, between Edessan and Nisibis,
      famous for the defeat of Crassus—the Haran from whence Abraham
      set out for the land of Canaan. This city has always been
      remarkable for its attachment to Sabaism—G]


      39 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxviii. p. 1312. Herodian, l. iv. p.
      168.]


      40 (return) [ The fondness of Caracalla for the name and ensigns
      of Alexander is still preserved on the medals of that emperor.
      See Spanheim, de Usu Numismatum, Dissertat. xii. Herodian (l. iv.
      p. 154) had seen very ridiculous pictures, in which a figure was
      drawn with one side of the face like Alexander, and the other
      like Caracalla.]


      After the extinction of the house of Severus, the Roman world
      remained three days without a master. The choice of the army (for
      the authority of a distant and feeble senate was little regarded)
      hung in anxious suspense, as no candidate presented himself whose
      distinguished birth and merit could engage their attachment and
      unite their suffrages. The decisive weight of the Prætorian
      guards elevated the hopes of their præfects, and these powerful
      ministers began to assert their _legal_ claim to fill the vacancy
      of the Imperial throne. Adventus, however, the senior præfect,
      conscious of his age and infirmities, of his small reputation,
      and his smaller abilities, resigned the dangerous honor to the
      crafty ambition of his colleague Macrinus, whose well-dissembled
      grief removed all suspicion of his being accessary to his
      master’s death. 41 The troops neither loved nor esteemed his
      character. They cast their eyes around in search of a competitor,
      and at last yielded with reluctance to his promises of unbounded
      liberality and indulgence. A short time after his accession, he
      conferred on his son Diadumenianus, at the age of only ten years,
      the Imperial title, and the popular name of Antoninus. The
      beautiful figure of the youth, assisted by an additional
      donative, for which the ceremony furnished a pretext, might
      attract, it was hoped, the favor of the army, and secure the
      doubtful throne of Macrinus.


      41 (return) [ Herodian, l. iv. p. 169. Hist. August. p. 94.]


      The authority of the new sovereign had been ratified by the
      cheerful submission of the senate and provinces. They exulted in
      their unexpected deliverance from a hated tyrant, and it seemed
      of little consequence to examine into the virtues of the
      successor of Caracalla. But as soon as the first transports of
      joy and surprise had subsided, they began to scrutinize the
      merits of Macrinus with a critical severity, and to arraign the
      nasty choice of the army. It had hitherto been considered as a
      fundamental maxim of the constitution, that the emperor must be
      always chosen in the senate, and the sovereign power, no longer
      exercised by the whole body, was always delegated to one of its
      members. But Macrinus was not a senator. 42 The sudden elevation
      of the Prætorian præfects betrayed the meanness of their origin;
      and the equestrian order was still in possession of that great
      office, which commanded with arbitrary sway the lives and
      fortunes of the senate. A murmur of indignation was heard, that a
      man, whose obscure 43 extraction had never been illustrated by
      any signal service, should dare to invest himself with the
      purple, instead of bestowing it on some distinguished senator,
      equal in birth and dignity to the splendor of the Imperial
      station. As soon as the character of Macrinus was surveyed by the
      sharp eye of discontent, some vices, and many defects, were
      easily discovered. The choice of his ministers was in many
      instances justly censured, and the dissatisfied people, with
      their usual candor, accused at once his indolent tameness and his
      excessive severity. 44


      42 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxxviii. p. 1350. Elagabalus reproached
      his predecessor with daring to seat himself on the throne;
      though, as Prætorian præfect, he could not have been admitted
      into the senate after the voice of the crier had cleared the
      house. The personal favor of Plautianus and Sejanus had broke
      through the established rule. They rose, indeed, from the
      equestrian order; but they preserved the præfecture, with the
      rank of senator and even with the annulship.]


      43 (return) [ He was a native of Cæsarea, in Numidia, and began
      his fortune by serving in the household of Plautian, from whose
      ruin he narrowly escaped. His enemies asserted that he was born a
      slave, and had exercised, among other infamous professions, that
      of Gladiator. The fashion of aspersing the birth and condition of
      an adversary seems to have lasted from the time of the Greek
      orators to the learned grammarians of the last age.]


      44 (return) [ Both Dion and Herodian speak of the virtues and
      vices of Macrinus with candor and impartiality; but the author of
      his life, in the Augustan History, seems to have implicitly
      copied some of the venal writers, employed by Elagabalus, to
      blacken the memory of his predecessor.]


      His rash ambition had climbed a height where it was difficult to
      stand with firmness, and impossible to fall without instant
      destruction. Trained in the arts of courts and the forms of civil
      business, he trembled in the presence of the fierce and
      undisciplined multitude, over whom he had assumed the command;
      his military talents were despised, and his personal courage
      suspected; a whisper that circulated in the camp, disclosed the
      fatal secret of the conspiracy against the late emperor,
      aggravated the guilt of murder by the baseness of hypocrisy, and
      heightened contempt by detestation. To alienate the soldiers, and
      to provoke inevitable ruin, the character of a reformer was only
      wanting; and such was the peculiar hardship of his fate, that
      Macrinus was compelled to exercise that invidious office. The
      prodigality of Caracalla had left behind it a long train of ruin
      and disorder; and if that worthless tyrant had been capable of
      reflecting on the sure consequences of his own conduct, he would
      perhaps have enjoyed the dark prospect of the distress and
      calamities which he bequeathed to his successors.


      In the management of this necessary reformation, Macrinus
      proceeded with a cautious prudence, which would have restored
      health and vigor to the Roman army in an easy and almost
      imperceptible manner. To the soldiers already engaged in the
      service, he was constrained to leave the dangerous privileges and
      extravagant pay given by Caracalla; but the new recruits were
      received on the more moderate though liberal establishment of
      Severus, and gradually formed to modesty and obedience. 45 One
      fatal error destroyed the salutary effects of this judicious
      plan. The numerous army, assembled in the East by the late
      emperor, instead of being immediately dispersed by Macrinus
      through the several provinces, was suffered to remain united in
      Syria, during the winter that followed his elevation. In the
      luxurious idleness of their quarters, the troops viewed their
      strength and numbers, communicated their complaints, and revolved
      in their minds the advantages of another revolution. The
      veterans, instead of being flattered by the advantageous
      distinction, were alarmed by the first steps of the emperor,
      which they considered as the presage of his future intentions.
      The recruits, with sullen reluctance, entered on a service, whose
      labors were increased while its rewards were diminished by a
      covetous and unwarlike sovereign. The murmurs of the army swelled
      with impunity into seditious clamors; and the partial mutinies
      betrayed a spirit of discontent and disaffection that waited only
      for the slightest occasion to break out on every side into a
      general rebellion. To minds thus disposed, the occasion soon
      presented itself.


      45 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxxiii. p. 1336. The sense of the author
      is as the intention of the emperor; but Mr. Wotton has mistaken
      both, by understanding the distinction, not of veterans and
      recruits, but of old and new legions. History of Rome, p. 347.]


      The empress Julia had experienced all the vicissitudes of
      fortune. From an humble station she had been raised to greatness,
      only to taste the superior bitterness of an exalted rank. She was
      doomed to weep over the death of one of her sons, and over the
      life of the other. The cruel fate of Caracalla, though her good
      sense must have long taught her to expect it, awakened the
      feelings of a mother and of an empress. Notwithstanding the
      respectful civility expressed by the usurper towards the widow of
      Severus, she descended with a painful struggle into the condition
      of a subject, and soon withdrew herself, by a voluntary death,
      from the anxious and humiliating dependence. 46 461 Julia Mæsa,
      her sister, was ordered to leave the court and Antioch. She
      retired to Emesa with an immense fortune, the fruit of twenty
      years’ favor accompanied by her two daughters, Soæmias and Mamæ,
      each of whom was a widow, and each had an only son. Bassianus,
      462 for that was the name of the son of Soæmias, was consecrated
      to the honorable ministry of high priest of the Sun; and this
      holy vocation, embraced either from prudence or superstition,
      contributed to raise the Syrian youth to the empire of Rome. A
      numerous body of troops was stationed at Emesa; and as the severe
      discipline of Macrinus had constrained them to pass the winter
      encamped, they were eager to revenge the cruelty of such
      unaccustomed hardships. The soldiers, who resorted in crowds to
      the temple of the Sun, beheld with veneration and delight the
      elegant dress and figure of the young pontiff; they recognized,
      or they thought that they recognized, the features of Caracalla,
      whose memory they now adored. The artful Mæsa saw and cherished
      their rising partiality, and readily sacrificing her daughter’s
      reputation to the fortune of her grandson, she insinuated that
      Bassianus was the natural son of their murdered sovereign. The
      sums distributed by her emissaries with a lavish hand silenced
      every objection, and the profusion sufficiently proved the
      affinity, or at least the resemblance, of Bassianus with the
      great original. The young Antoninus (for he had assumed and
      polluted that respectable name) was declared emperor by the
      troops of Emesa, asserted his hereditary right, and called aloud
      on the armies to follow the standard of a young and liberal
      prince, who had taken up arms to revenge his father’s death and
      the oppression of the military order. 47


      46 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxviii. p. 1330. The abridgment of
      Xiphilin, though less particular, is in this place clearer than
      the original.]


      461 (return) [ As soon as this princess heard of the death of
      Caracalla, she wished to starve herself to death: the respect
      shown to her by Macrinus, in making no change in her attendants
      or her court, induced her to prolong her life. But it appears, as
      far as the mutilated text of Dion and the imperfect epitome of
      Xiphilin permit us to judge, that she conceived projects of
      ambition, and endeavored to raise herself to the empire. She
      wished to tread in the steps of Semiramis and Nitocris, whose
      country bordered on her own. Macrinus sent her an order
      immediately to leave Antioch, and to retire wherever she chose.
      She returned to her former purpose, and starved herself to
      death.—G.]


      462 (return) [ He inherited this name from his great-grandfather
      of the mother’s side, Bassianus, father of Julia Mæsa, his
      grandmother, and of Julia Domna, wife of Severus. Victor (in his
      epitome) is perhaps the only historian who has given the key to
      this genealogy, when speaking of Caracalla. His Bassianus ex avi
      materni nomine dictus. Caracalla, Elagabalus, and Alexander
      Seyerus, bore successively this name.—G.]


      47 (return) [ According to Lampridius, (Hist. August. p. 135,)
      Alexander Severus lived twenty-nine years three months and seven
      days. As he was killed March 19, 235, he was born December 12,
      205 and was consequently about this time thirteen years old, as
      his elder cousin might be about seventeen. This computation suits
      much better the history of the young princes than that of
      Herodian, (l. v. p. 181,) who represents them as three years
      younger; whilst, by an opposite error of chronology, he lengthens
      the reign of Elagabalus two years beyond its real duration. For
      the particulars of the conspiracy, see Dion, l. lxxviii. p. 1339.
      Herodian, l. v. p. 184.]


      Whilst a conspiracy of women and eunuchs was concerted with
      prudence, and conducted with rapid vigor, Macrinus, who, by a
      decisive motion, might have crushed his infant enemy, floated
      between the opposite extremes of terror and security, which alike
      fixed him inactive at Antioch. A spirit of rebellion diffused
      itself through all the camps and garrisons of Syria, successive
      detachments murdered their officers, 48 and joined the party of
      the rebels; and the tardy restitution of military pay and
      privileges was imputed to the acknowledged weakness of Macrinus.
      At length he marched out of Antioch, to meet the increasing and
      zealous army of the young pretender. His own troops seemed to
      take the field with faintness and reluctance; but, in the heat of
      the battle, 49 the Prætorian guards, almost by an involuntary
      impulse, asserted the superiority of their valor and discipline.
      The rebel ranks were broken; when the mother and grandmother of
      the Syrian prince, who, according to their eastern custom, had
      attended the army, threw themselves from their covered chariots,
      and, by exciting the compassion of the soldiers, endeavored to
      animate their drooping courage. Antoninus himself, who, in the
      rest of his life, never acted like a man, in this important
      crisis of his fate, approved himself a hero, mounted his horse,
      and, at the head of his rallied troops, charged sword in hand
      among the thickest of the enemy; whilst the eunuch Gannys, 491
      whose occupations had been confined to female cares and the soft
      luxury of Asia, displayed the talents of an able and experienced
      general. The battle still raged with doubtful violence, and
      Macrinus might have obtained the victory, had he not betrayed his
      own cause by a shameful and precipitate flight. His cowardice
      served only to protract his life a few days, and to stamp
      deserved ignominy on his misfortunes. It is scarcely necessary to
      add, that his son Diadumenianus was involved in the same fate.


      As soon as the stubborn Prætorians could be convinced that they
      fought for a prince who had basely deserted them, they
      surrendered to the conqueror: the contending parties of the Roman
      army, mingling tears of joy and tenderness, united under the
      banners of the imagined son of Caracalla, and the East
      acknowledged with pleasure the first emperor of Asiatic
      extraction.


      48 (return) [ By a most dangerous proclamation of the pretended
      Antoninus, every soldier who brought in his officer’s head became
      entitled to his private estate, as well as to his military
      commission.]


      49 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxviii. p. 1345. Herodian, l. v. p. 186.
      The battle was fought near the village of Immæ, about
      two-and-twenty miles from Antioch.]


      491 (return) [ Gannys was not a eunuch. Dion, p. 1355.—W]


      The letters of Macrinus had condescended to inform the senate of
      the slight disturbance occasioned by an impostor in Syria, and a
      decree immediately passed, declaring the rebel and his family
      public enemies; with a promise of pardon, however, to such of his
      deluded adherents as should merit it by an immediate return to
      their duty. During the twenty days that elapsed from the
      declaration of the victory of Antoninus (for in so short an
      interval was the fate of the Roman world decided,) the capital
      and the provinces, more especially those of the East, were
      distracted with hopes and fears, agitated with tumult, and
      stained with a useless effusion of civil blood, since whosoever
      of the rivals prevailed in Syria must reign over the empire. The
      specious letters in which the young conqueror announced his
      victory to the obedient senate were filled with professions of
      virtue and moderation; the shining examples of Marcus and
      Augustus, he should ever consider as the great rule of his
      administration; and he affected to dwell with pride on the
      striking resemblance of his own age and fortunes with those of
      Augustus, who in the earliest youth had revenged, by a successful
      war, the murder of his father. By adopting the style of Marcus
      Aurelius Antoninus, son of Antoninus and grandson of Severus, he
      tacitly asserted his hereditary claim to the empire; but, by
      assuming the tribunitian and proconsular powers before they had
      been conferred on him by a decree of the senate, he offended the
      delicacy of Roman prejudice. This new and injudicious violation
      of the constitution was probably dictated either by the ignorance
      of his Syrian courtiers, or the fierce disdain of his military
      followers. 50


      50 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1353.]


      As the attention of the new emperor was diverted by the most
      trifling amusements, he wasted many months in his luxurious
      progress from Syria to Italy, passed at Nicomedia his first
      winter after his victory, and deferred till the ensuing summer
      his triumphal entry into the capital. A faithful picture,
      however, which preceded his arrival, and was placed by his
      immediate order over the altar of Victory in the senate house,
      conveyed to the Romans the just but unworthy resemblance of his
      person and manners. He was drawn in his sacerdotal robes of silk
      and gold, after the loose flowing fashion of the Medes and
      Phœnicians; his head was covered with a lofty tiara, his numerous
      collars and bracelets were adorned with gems of an inestimable
      value. His eyebrows were tinged with black, and his cheeks
      painted with an artificial red and white. 51 The grave senators
      confessed with a sigh, that, after having long experienced the
      stern tyranny of their own countrymen, Rome was at length humbled
      beneath the effeminate luxury of Oriental despotism.


      51 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1363. Herodian, l. v. p. 189.]


      The Sun was worshipped at Emesa, under the name of Elagabalus, 52
      and under the form of a black conical stone, which, as it was
      universally believed, had fallen from heaven on that sacred
      place. To this protecting deity, Antoninus, not without some
      reason, ascribed his elevation to the throne. The display of
      superstitious gratitude was the only serious business of his
      reign. The triumph of the god of Emesa over all the religions of
      the earth, was the great object of his zeal and vanity; and the
      appellation of Elagabalus (for he presumed as pontiff and
      favorite to adopt that sacred name) was dearer to him than all
      the titles of Imperial greatness. In a solemn procession through
      the streets of Rome, the way was strewed with gold dust; the
      black stone, set in precious gems, was placed on a chariot drawn
      by six milk-white horses richly caparisoned. The pious emperor
      held the reins, and, supported by his ministers, moved slowly
      backwards, that he might perpetually enjoy the felicity of the
      divine presence. In a magnificent temple raised on the Palatine
      Mount, the sacrifices of the god Elagabalus were celebrated with
      every circumstance of cost and solemnity. The richest wines, the
      most extraordinary victims, and the rarest aromatics, were
      profusely consumed on his altar. Around the altar, a chorus of
      Syrian damsels performed their lascivious dances to the sound of
      barbarian music, whilst the gravest personages of the state and
      army, clothed in long Phœnician tunics, officiated in the meanest
      functions, with affected zeal and secret indignation. 53


      52 (return) [ This name is derived by the learned from two Syrian
      words, Ela a God, and Gabal, to form, the forming or plastic god,
      a proper, and even happy epithet for the sun. Wotton’s History of
      Rome, p. 378 Note: The name of Elagabalus has been disfigured in
      various ways. Herodian calls him; Lampridius, and the more modern
      writers, make him Heliogabalus. Dion calls him Elegabalus; but
      Elegabalus was the true name, as it appears on the medals.
      (Eckhel. de Doct. num. vet. t. vii. p. 250.) As to its etymology,
      that which Gibbon adduces is given by Bochart, Chan. ii. 5; but
      Salmasius, on better grounds. (not. in Lamprid. in Elagab.,)
      derives the name of Elagabalus from the idol of that god,
      represented by Herodian and the medals in the form of a mountain,
      (gibel in Hebrew,) or great stone cut to a point, with marks
      which represent the sun. As it was not permitted, at Hierapolis,
      in Syria, to make statues of the sun and moon, because, it was
      said, they are themselves sufficiently visible, the sun was
      represented at Emesa in the form of a great stone, which, as it
      appeared, had fallen from heaven. Spanheim, Cæsar. notes, p.
      46.—G. The name of Elagabalus, in “nummis rarius legetur.”
      Rasche, Lex. Univ. Ref. Numm. Rasche quotes two.—M]


      53 (return) [ Herodian, l. v. p. 190.]


      Chapter VI: Death Of Severus, Tyranny Of Caracalla, Usurpation Of
      Marcinus.—Part III.


      To this temple, as to the common centre of religious worship, the
      Imperial fanatic attempted to remove the Ancilia, the Palladium,
      54 and all the sacred pledges of the faith of Numa. A crowd of
      inferior deities attended in various stations the majesty of the
      god of Emesa; but his court was still imperfect, till a female of
      distinguished rank was admitted to his bed. Pallas had been first
      chosen for his consort; but as it was dreaded lest her warlike
      terrors might affright the soft delicacy of a Syrian deity, the
      Moon, adored by the Africans under the name of Astarte, was
      deemed a more suitable companion for the Sun. Her image, with the
      rich offerings of her temple as a marriage portion, was
      transported with solemn pomp from Carthage to Rome, and the day
      of these mystic nuptials was a general festival in the capital
      and throughout the empire. 55


      54 (return) [ He broke into the sanctuary of Vesta, and carried
      away a statue, which he supposed to be the palladium; but the
      vestals boasted that, by a pious fraud, they had imposed a
      counterfeit image on the profane intruder. Hist. August., p.
      103.]


      55 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1360. Herodian, l. v. p. 193.
      The subjects of the empire were obliged to make liberal presents
      to the new married couple; and whatever they had promised during
      the life of Elagabalus was carefully exacted under the
      administration of Mamæa.]


      A rational voluptuary adheres with invariable respect to the
      temperate dictates of nature, and improves the gratifications of
      sense by social intercourse, endearing connections, and the soft
      coloring of taste and the imagination. But Elagabalus, (I speak
      of the emperor of that name,) corrupted by his youth, his
      country, and his fortune, abandoned himself to the grossest
      pleasures with ungoverned fury, and soon found disgust and
      satiety in the midst of his enjoyments. The inflammatory powers
      of art were summoned to his aid: the confused multitude of women,
      of wines, and of dishes, and the studied variety of attitude and
      sauces, served to revive his languid appetites. New terms and new
      inventions in these sciences, the only ones cultivated and
      patronized by the monarch, 56 signalized his reign, and
      transmitted his infamy to succeeding times. A capricious
      prodigality supplied the want of taste and elegance; and whilst
      Elagabalus lavished away the treasures of his people in the
      wildest extravagance, his own voice and that of his flatterers
      applauded a spirit of magnificence unknown to the tameness of his
      predecessors. To confound the order of seasons and climates, 57
      to sport with the passions and prejudices of his subjects, and to
      subvert every law of nature and decency, were in the number of
      his most delicious amusements. A long train of concubines, and a
      rapid succession of wives, among whom was a vestal virgin,
      ravished by force from her sacred asylum, 58 were insufficient to
      satisfy the impotence of his passions. The master of the Roman
      world affected to copy the dress and manners of the female sex,
      preferred the distaff to the sceptre, and dishonored the
      principal dignities of the empire by distributing them among his
      numerous lovers; one of whom was publicly invested with the title
      and authority of the emperor’s, or, as he more properly styled
      himself, of the empress’s husband. 59


      56 (return) [ The invention of a new sauce was liberally
      rewarded; but if it was not relished, the inventor was confined
      to eat of nothing else till he had discovered another more
      agreeable to the Imperial palate Hist. August. p. 111.]


      57 (return) [ He never would eat sea-fish except at a great
      distance from the sea; he then would distribute vast quantities
      of the rarest sorts, brought at an immense expense, to the
      peasants of the inland country. Hist. August. p. 109.]


      58 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1358. Herodian, l. v. p. 192.]


      59 (return) [ Hierocles enjoyed that honor; but he would have
      been supplanted by one Zoticus, had he not contrived, by a
      potion, to enervate the powers of his rival, who, being found on
      trial unequal to his reputation, was driven with ignominy from
      the palace. Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1363, 1364. A dancer was made
      præfect of the city, a charioteer præfect of the watch, a barber
      præfect of the provisions. These three ministers, with many
      inferior officers, were all recommended enormitate membrorum.
      Hist. August. p. 105.]


      It may seem probable, the vices and follies of Elagabalus have
      been adorned by fancy, and blackened by prejudice. 60 Yet,
      confining ourselves to the public scenes displayed before the
      Roman people, and attested by grave and contemporary historians,
      their inexpressible infamy surpasses that of any other age or
      country. The license of an eastern monarch is secluded from the
      eye of curiosity by the inaccessible walls of his seraglio. The
      sentiments of honor and gallantry have introduced a refinement of
      pleasure, a regard for decency, and a respect for the public
      opinion, into the modern courts of Europe; 601 but the corrupt
      and opulent nobles of Rome gratified every vice that could be
      collected from the mighty conflux of nations and manners. Secure
      of impunity, careless of censure, they lived without restraint in
      the patient and humble society of their slaves and parasites. The
      emperor, in his turn, viewing every rank of his subjects with the
      same contemptuous indifference, asserted without control his
      sovereign privilege of lust and luxury.


      60 (return) [ Even the credulous compiler of his life, in the
      Augustan History (p. 111) is inclined to suspect that his vices
      may have been exaggerated.]


      601 (return) [ Wenck has justly observed that Gibbon should have
      reckoned the influence of Christianity in this great change. In
      the most savage times, and the most corrupt courts, since the
      introduction of Christianity there have been no Neros or
      Domitians, no Commodus or Elagabalus.—M.]


      The most worthless of mankind are not afraid to condemn in others
      the same disorders which they allow in themselves; and can
      readily discover some nice difference of age, character, or
      station, to justify the partial distinction. The licentious
      soldiers, who had raised to the throne the dissolute son of
      Caracalla, blushed at their ignominious choice, and turned with
      disgust from that monster, to contemplate with pleasure the
      opening virtues of his cousin Alexander, the son of Mamæa. The
      crafty Mæsa, sensible that her grandson Elagabalus must
      inevitably destroy himself by his own vices, had provided another
      and surer support of her family. Embracing a favorable moment of
      fondness and devotion, she had persuaded the young emperor to
      adopt Alexander, and to invest him with the title of Cæsar, that
      his own divine occupations might be no longer interrupted by the
      care of the earth. In the second rank that amiable prince soon
      acquired the affections of the public, and excited the tyrant’s
      jealousy, who resolved to terminate the dangerous competition,
      either by corrupting the manners, or by taking away the life, of
      his rival. His arts proved unsuccessful; his vain designs were
      constantly discovered by his own loquacious folly, and
      disappointed by those virtuous and faithful servants whom the
      prudence of Mamæa had placed about the person of her son. In a
      hasty sally of passion, Elagabalus resolved to execute by force
      what he had been unable to compass by fraud, and by a despotic
      sentence degraded his cousin from the rank and honors of Cæsar.
      The message was received in the senate with silence, and in the
      camp with fury. The Prætorian guards swore to protect Alexander,
      and to revenge the dishonored majesty of the throne. The tears
      and promises of the trembling Elagabalus, who only begged them to
      spare his life, and to leave him in the possession of his beloved
      Hierocles, diverted their just indignation; and they contented
      themselves with empowering their præfects to watch over the
      safety of Alexander, and the conduct of the emperor. 61


      61 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxix. p. 1365. Herodian, l. v. p.
      195—201. Hist. August. p. 105. The last of the three historians
      seems to have followed the best authors in his account of the
      revolution.]


      It was impossible that such a reconciliation should last, or that
      even the mean soul of Elagabalus could hold an empire on such
      humiliating terms of dependence. He soon attempted, by a
      dangerous experiment, to try the temper of the soldiers. The
      report of the death of Alexander, and the natural suspicion that
      he had been murdered, inflamed their passions into fury, and the
      tempest of the camp could only be appeased by the presence and
      authority of the popular youth. Provoked at this new instance of
      their affection for his cousin, and their contempt for his
      person, the emperor ventured to punish some of the leaders of the
      mutiny. His unseasonable severity proved instantly fatal to his
      minions, his mother, and himself. Elagabalus was massacred by the
      indignant Prætorians, his mutilated corpse dragged through the
      streets of the city, and thrown into the Tiber. His memory was
      branded with eternal infamy by the senate; the justice of whose
      decree has been ratified by posterity. 62


      62 (return) [ The æra of the death of Elagabalus, and of the
      accession of Alexander, has employed the learning and ingenuity
      of Pagi, Tillemont, Valsecchi, Vignoli, and Torre, bishop of
      Adria. The question is most assuredly intricate; but I still
      adhere to the authority of Dion, the truth of whose calculations
      is undeniable, and the purity of whose text is justified by the
      agreement of Xiphilin, Zonaras, and Cedrenus. Elagabalus reigned
      three years nine months and four days, from his victory over
      Macrinus, and was killed March 10, 222. But what shall we reply
      to the medals, undoubtedly genuine, which reckon the fifth year
      of his tribunitian power? We shall reply, with the learned
      Valsecchi, that the usurpation of Macrinus was annihilated, and
      that the son of Caracalla dated his reign from his father’s
      death? After resolving this great difficulty, the smaller knots
      of this question may be easily untied, or cut asunder. Note: This
      opinion of Valsecchi has been triumphantly contested by Eckhel,
      who has shown the impossibility of reconciling it with the medals
      of Elagabalus, and has given the most satisfactory explanation of
      the five tribunates of that emperor. He ascended the throne and
      received the tribunitian power the 16th of May, in the year of
      Rome 971; and on the 1st January of the next year, 972, he began
      a new tribunate, according to the custom established by preceding
      emperors. During the years 972, 973, 974, he enjoyed the
      tribunate, and commenced his fifth in the year 975, during which
      he was killed on the 10th March. Eckhel de Doct. Num. viii. 430
      &c.—G.]


      In the room of Elagabalus, his cousin Alexander was raised to the
      throne by the Prætorian guards. His relation to the family of
      Severus, whose name he assumed, was the same as that of his
      predecessor; his virtue and his danger had already endeared him
      to the Romans, and the eager liberality of the senate conferred
      upon him, in one day, the various titles and powers of the
      Imperial dignity. 63 But as Alexander was a modest and dutiful
      youth, of only seventeen years of age, the reins of government
      were in the hands of two women, of his mother, Mamæa, and of
      Mæsa, his grandmother. After the death of the latter, who
      survived but a short time the elevation of Alexander, Mamæa
      remained the sole regent of her son and of the empire.


      63 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 114. By this unusual
      precipitation, the senate meant to confound the hopes of
      pretenders, and prevent the factions of the armies.]


      In every age and country, the wiser, or at least the stronger, of
      the two sexes, has usurped the powers of the state, and confined
      the other to the cares and pleasures of domestic life. In
      hereditary monarchies, however, and especially in those of modern
      Europe, the gallant spirit of chivalry, and the law of
      succession, have accustomed us to allow a singular exception; and
      a woman is often acknowledged the absolute sovereign of a great
      kingdom, in which she would be deemed incapable of exercising the
      smallest employment, civil or military. But as the Roman emperors
      were still considered as the generals and magistrates of the
      republic, their wives and mothers, although distinguished by the
      name of Augusta, were never associated to their personal honors;
      and a female reign would have appeared an inexpiable prodigy in
      the eyes of those primitive Romans, who married without love, or
      loved without delicacy and respect. 64 The haughty Agrippina
      aspired, indeed, to share the honors of the empire which she had
      conferred on her son; but her mad ambition, detested by every
      citizen who felt for the dignity of Rome, was disappointed by the
      artful firmness of Seneca and Burrhus. 65 The good sense, or the
      indifference, of succeeding princes, restrained them from
      offending the prejudices of their subjects; and it was reserved
      for the profligate Elagabalus to discharge the acts of the senate
      with the name of his mother Soæmias, who was placed by the side
      of the consuls, and subscribed, as a regular member, the decrees
      of the legislative assembly. Her more prudent sister, Mamæa,
      declined the useless and odious prerogative, and a solemn law was
      enacted, excluding women forever from the senate, and devoting to
      the infernal gods the head of the wretch by whom this sanction
      should be violated. 66 The substance, not the pageantry, of power
      was the object of Mamæa’s manly ambition. She maintained an
      absolute and lasting empire over the mind of her son, and in his
      affection the mother could not brook a rival. Alexander, with her
      consent, married the daughter of a patrician; but his respect for
      his father-in-law, and love for the empress, were inconsistent
      with the tenderness of interest of Mamæa. The patrician was
      executed on the ready accusation of treason, and the wife of
      Alexander driven with ignominy from the palace, and banished into
      Africa. 67


      64 (return) [ Metellus Numidicus, the censor, acknowledged to the
      Roman people, in a public oration, that had kind nature allowed
      us to exist without the help of women, we should be delivered
      from a very troublesome companion; and he could recommend
      matrimony only as the sacrifice of private pleasure to public
      duty. Aulus Gellius, i. 6.]


      65 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xiii. 5.]


      66 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 102, 107.]


      67 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxx. p. 1369. Herodian, l. vi. p. 206.
      Hist. August. p. 131. Herodian represents the patrician as
      innocent. The Augustian History, on the authority of Dexippus,
      condemns him, as guilty of a conspiracy against the life of
      Alexander. It is impossible to pronounce between them; but Dion
      is an irreproachable witness of the jealousy and cruelty of Mamæa
      towards the young empress, whose hard fate Alexander lamented,
      but durst not oppose.]


      Notwithstanding this act of jealous cruelty, as well as some
      instances of avarice, with which Mamæa is charged, the general
      tenor of her administration was equally for the benefit of her
      son and of the empire. With the approbation of the senate, she
      chose sixteen of the wisest and most virtuous senators as a
      perpetual council of state, before whom every public business of
      moment was debated and determined. The celebrated Ulpian, equally
      distinguished by his knowledge of, and his respect for, the laws
      of Rome, was at their head; and the prudent firmness of this
      aristocracy restored order and authority to the government. As
      soon as they had purged the city from foreign superstition and
      luxury, the remains of the capricious tyranny of Elagabalus, they
      applied themselves to remove his worthless creatures from every
      department of the public administration, and to supply their
      places with men of virtue and ability. Learning, and the love of
      justice, became the only recommendations for civil offices;
      valor, and the love of discipline, the only qualifications for
      military employments. 68


      68 (return) [ Herodian, l. vi. p. 203. Hist. August. p. 119. The
      latter insinuates, that when any law was to be passed, the
      council was assisted by a number of able lawyers and experienced
      senators, whose opinions were separately given, and taken down in
      writing.]


      But the most important care of Mamæa and her wise counsellors,
      was to form the character of the young emperor, on whose personal
      qualities the happiness or misery of the Roman world must
      ultimately depend. The fortunate soil assisted, and even
      prevented, the hand of cultivation. An excellent understanding
      soon convinced Alexander of the advantages of virtue, the
      pleasure of knowledge, and the necessity of labor. A natural
      mildness and moderation of temper preserved him from the assaults
      of passion, and the allurements of vice. His unalterable regard
      for his mother, and his esteem for the wise Ulpian, guarded his
      unexperienced youth from the poison of flattery. 581


      581 (return) [ Alexander received into his chapel all the
      religions which prevailed in the empire; he admitted Jesus
      Christ, Abraham, Orpheus, Apollonius of Tyana, &c. It was almost
      certain that his mother Mamæa had instructed him in the morality
      of Christianity. Historians in general agree in calling her a
      Christian; there is reason to believe that she had begun to have
      a taste for the principles of Christianity. (See Tillemont,
      Alexander Severus) Gibbon has not noticed this circumstance; he
      appears to have wished to lower the character of this empress; he
      has throughout followed the narrative of Herodian, who, by the
      acknowledgment of Capitolinus himself, detested Alexander.
      Without believing the exaggerated praises of Lampridius, he ought
      not to have followed the unjust severity of Herodian, and, above
      all, not to have forgotten to say that the virtuous Alexander
      Severus had insured to the Jews the preservation of their
      privileges, and permitted the exercise of Christianity. Hist.
      Aug. p. 121. The Christians had established their worship in a
      public place, of which the victuallers (cauponarii) claimed, not
      the property, but possession by custom. Alexander answered, that
      it was better that the place should be used for the service of
      God, in any form, than for victuallers.—G. I have scrupled to
      omit this note, as it contains some points worthy of notice; but
      it is very unjust to Gibbon, who mentions almost all the
      circumstances, which he is accused of omitting, in another, and,
      according to his plan, a better place, and, perhaps, in stronger
      terms than M. Guizot. See Chap. xvi.— M.]


      The simple journal of his ordinary occupations exhibits a
      pleasing picture of an accomplished emperor, 69 and, with some
      allowance for the difference of manners, might well deserve the
      imitation of modern princes. Alexander rose early: the first
      moments of the day were consecrated to private devotion, and his
      domestic chapel was filled with the images of those heroes, who,
      by improving or reforming human life, had deserved the grateful
      reverence of posterity. But as he deemed the service of mankind
      the most acceptable worship of the gods, the greatest part of his
      morning hours was employed in his council, where he discussed
      public affairs, and determined private causes, with a patience
      and discretion above his years. The dryness of business was
      relieved by the charms of literature; and a portion of time was
      always set apart for his favorite studies of poetry, history, and
      philosophy. The works of Virgil and Horace, the republics of
      Plato and Cicero, formed his taste, enlarged his understanding,
      and gave him the noblest ideas of man and government. The
      exercises of the body succeeded to those of the mind; and
      Alexander, who was tall, active, and robust, surpassed most of
      his equals in the gymnastic arts. Refreshed by the use of the
      bath and a slight dinner, he resumed, with new vigor, the
      business of the day; and, till the hour of supper, the principal
      meal of the Romans, he was attended by his secretaries, with whom
      he read and answered the multitude of letters, memorials, and
      petitions, that must have been addressed to the master of the
      greatest part of the world. His table was served with the most
      frugal simplicity, and whenever he was at liberty to consult his
      own inclination, the company consisted of a few select friends,
      men of learning and virtue, amongst whom Ulpian was constantly
      invited. Their conversation was familiar and instructive; and the
      pauses were occasionally enlivened by the recital of some
      pleasing composition, which supplied the place of the dancers,
      comedians, and even gladiators, so frequently summoned to the
      tables of the rich and luxurious Romans. 70 The dress of
      Alexander was plain and modest, his demeanor courteous and
      affable: at the proper hours his palace was open to all his
      subjects, but the voice of a crier was heard, as in the
      Eleusinian mysteries, pronouncing the same salutary admonition:
      “Let none enter these holy walls, unless he is conscious of a
      pure and innocent mind.” 71


      69 (return) [ See his life in the Augustan History. The
      undistinguishing compiler has buried these interesting anecdotes
      under a load of trivial unmeaning circumstances.]


      70 (return) [ See the 13th Satire of Juvenal.]


      71 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 119.]


      Such a uniform tenor of life, which left not a moment for vice or
      folly, is a better proof of the wisdom and justice of Alexander’s
      government, than all the trifling details preserved in the
      compilation of Lampridius. Since the accession of Commodus, the
      Roman world had experienced, during the term of forty years, the
      successive and various vices of four tyrants. From the death of
      Elagabalus, it enjoyed an auspicious calm of thirteen years. 711
      The provinces, relieved from the oppressive taxes invented by
      Caracalla and his pretended son, flourished in peace and
      prosperity, under the administration of magistrates who were
      convinced by experience that to deserve the love of the subjects
      was their best and only method of obtaining the favor of their
      sovereign. While some gentle restraints were imposed on the
      innocent luxury of the Roman people, the price of provisions and
      the interest of money, were reduced by the paternal care of
      Alexander, whose prudent liberality, without distressing the
      industrious, supplied the wants and amusements of the populace.
      The dignity, the freedom, the authority of the senate was
      restored; and every virtuous senator might approach the person of
      the emperor without a fear and without a blush.


      711 (return) [ Wenck observes that Gibbon, enchanted with the
      virtue of Alexander has heightened, particularly in this
      sentence, its effect on the state of the world. His own account,
      which follows, of the insurrections and foreign wars, is not in
      harmony with this beautiful picture.—M.]


      The name of Antoninus, ennobled by the virtues of Pius and
      Marcus, had been communicated by adoption to the dissolute Verus,
      and by descent to the cruel Commodus. It became the honorable
      appellation of the sons of Severus, was bestowed on young
      Diadumenianus, and at length prostituted to the infamy of the
      high priest of Emesa. Alexander, though pressed by the studied,
      and, perhaps, sincere importunity of the senate, nobly refused
      the borrowed lustre of a name; whilst in his whole conduct he
      labored to restore the glories and felicity of the age of the
      genuine Antonines. 72


      72 (return) [ See, in the Hist. August. p. 116, 117, the whole
      contest between Alexander and the senate, extracted from the
      journals of that assembly. It happened on the sixth of March,
      probably of the year 223, when the Romans had enjoyed, almost a
      twelvemonth, the blessings of his reign. Before the appellation
      of Antoninus was offered him as a title of honor, the senate
      waited to see whether Alexander would not assume it as a family
      name.]


      In the civil administration of Alexander, wisdom was enforced by
      power, and the people, sensible of the public felicity, repaid
      their benefactor with their love and gratitude. There still
      remained a greater, a more necessary, but a more difficult
      enterprise; the reformation of the military order, whose interest
      and temper, confirmed by long impunity, rendered them impatient
      of the restraints of discipline, and careless of the blessings of
      public tranquillity. In the execution of his design, the emperor
      affected to display his love, and to conceal his fear of the
      army. The most rigid economy in every other branch of the
      administration supplied a fund of gold and silver for the
      ordinary pay and the extraordinary rewards of the troops. In
      their marches he relaxed the severe obligation of carrying
      seventeen days’ provision on their shoulders. Ample magazines
      were formed along the public roads, and as soon as they entered
      the enemy’s country, a numerous train of mules and camels waited
      on their haughty laziness. As Alexander despaired of correcting
      the luxury of his soldiers, he attempted, at least, to direct it
      to objects of martial pomp and ornament, fine horses, splendid
      armor, and shields enriched with silver and gold. He shared
      whatever fatigues he was obliged to impose, visited, in person,
      the sick and wounded, preserved an exact register of their
      services and his own gratitude, and expressed on every occasion,
      the warmest regard for a body of men, whose welfare, as he
      affected to declare, was so closely connected with that of the
      state. 73 By the most gentle arts he labored to inspire the
      fierce multitude with a sense of duty, and to restore at least a
      faint image of that discipline to which the Romans owed their
      empire over so many other nations, as warlike and more powerful
      than themselves. But his prudence was vain, his courage fatal,
      and the attempt towards a reformation served only to inflame the
      ills it was meant to cure.


      73 (return) [ It was a favorite saying of the emperor’s Se
      milites magis servare, quam seipsum, quod salus publica in his
      esset. Hist. Aug. p. 130.]


      The Prætorian guards were attached to the youth of Alexander.
      They loved him as a tender pupil, whom they had saved from a
      tyrant’s fury, and placed on the Imperial throne. That amiable
      prince was sensible of the obligation; but as his gratitude was
      restrained within the limits of reason and justice, they soon
      were more dissatisfied with the virtues of Alexander, than they
      had ever been with the vices of Elagabalus. Their præfect, the
      wise Ulpian, was the friend of the laws and of the people; he was
      considered as the enemy of the soldiers, and to his pernicious
      counsels every scheme of reformation was imputed. Some trifling
      accident blew up their discontent into a furious mutiny; and the
      civil war raged, during three days, in Rome, whilst the life of
      that excellent minister was defended by the grateful people.
      Terrified, at length, by the sight of some houses in flames, and
      by the threats of a general conflagration, the people yielded
      with a sigh, and left the virtuous but unfortunate Ulpian to his
      fate. He was pursued into the Imperial palace, and massacred at
      the feet of his master, who vainly strove to cover him with the
      purple, and to obtain his pardon from the inexorable soldiers.
      731 Such was the deplorable weakness of government, that the
      emperor was unable to revenge his murdered friend and his
      insulted dignity, without stooping to the arts of patience and
      dissimulation. Epagathus, the principal leader of the mutiny, was
      removed from Rome, by the honorable employment of præfect of
      Egypt: from that high rank he was gently degraded to the
      government of Crete; and when at length, his popularity among the
      guards was effaced by time and absence, Alexander ventured to
      inflict the tardy but deserved punishment of his crimes. 74 Under
      the reign of a just and virtuous prince, the tyranny of the army
      threatened with instant death his most faithful ministers, who
      were suspected of an intention to correct their intolerable
      disorders. The historian Dion Cassius had commanded the Pannonian
      legions with the spirit of ancient discipline. Their brethren of
      Rome, embracing the common cause of military license, demanded
      the head of the reformer. Alexander, however, instead of yielding
      to their seditious clamors, showed a just sense of his merit and
      services, by appointing him his colleague in the consulship, and
      defraying from his own treasury the expense of that vain dignity:
      but as was justly apprehended, that if the soldiers beheld him
      with the ensigns of his office, they would revenge the insult in
      his blood, the nominal first magistrate of the state retired, by
      the emperor’s advice, from the city, and spent the greatest part
      of his consulship at his villas in Campania. 75 751


      731 (return) [ Gibbon has confounded two events altogether
      different— the quarrel of the people with the Prætorians, which
      lasted three days, and the assassination of Ulpian by the latter.
      Dion relates first the death of Ulpian, afterwards, reverting
      back according to a manner which is usual with him, he says that
      during the life of Ulpian, there had been a war of three days
      between the Prætorians and the people. But Ulpian was not the
      cause. Dion says, on the contrary, that it was occasioned by some
      unimportant circumstance; whilst he assigns a weighty reason for
      the murder of Ulpian, the judgment by which that Prætorian
      præfect had condemned his predecessors, Chrestus and Flavian, to
      death, whom the soldiers wished to revenge. Zosimus (l. 1, c.
      xi.) attributes this sentence to Mamæra; but, even then, the
      troops might have imputed it to Ulpian, who had reaped all the
      advantage and was otherwise odious to them.—W.]


      74 (return) [ Though the author of the life of Alexander (Hist.
      August. p. 182) mentions the sedition raised against Ulpian by
      the soldiers, he conceals the catastrophe, as it might discover a
      weakness in the administration of his hero. From this designed
      omission, we may judge of the weight and candor of that author.]


      75 (return) [ For an account of Ulpian’s fate and his own danger,
      see the mutilated conclusion of Dion’s History, l. lxxx. p.
      1371.]


      751 (return) [ Dion possessed no estates in Campania, and was not
      rich. He only says that the emperor advised him to reside, during
      his consulate, in some place out of Rome; that he returned to
      Rome after the end of his consulate, and had an interview with
      the emperor in Campania. He asked and obtained leave to pass the
      rest of his life in his native city, (Nice, in Bithynia: ) it was
      there that he finished his history, which closes with his second
      consulship.—W.]


      Chapter VI: Death Of Severus, Tyranny Of Caracalla, Usurpation Of
      Marcinus.—Part IV.


      The lenity of the emperor confirmed the insolence of the troops;
      the legions imitated the example of the guards, and defended
      their prerogative of licentiousness with the same furious
      obstinacy. The administration of Alexander was an unavailing
      struggle against the corruption of his age. In llyricum, in
      Mauritania, in Armenia, in Mesopotamia, in Germany, fresh
      mutinies perpetually broke out; his officers were murdered, his
      authority was insulted, and his life at last sacrificed to the
      fierce discontents of the army. 76 One particular fact well
      deserves to be recorded, as it illustrates the manners of the
      troops, and exhibits a singular instance of their return to a
      sense of duty and obedience. Whilst the emperor lay at Antioch,
      in his Persian expedition, the particulars of which we shall
      hereafter relate, the punishment of some soldiers, who had been
      discovered in the baths of women, excited a sedition in the
      legion to which they belonged. Alexander ascended his tribunal,
      and with a modest firmness represented to the armed multitude the
      absolute necessity, as well as his inflexible resolution, of
      correcting the vices introduced by his impure predecessor, and of
      maintaining the discipline, which could not be relaxed without
      the ruin of the Roman name and empire. Their clamors interrupted
      his mild expostulation. “Reserve your shout,” said the undaunted
      emperor, “till you take the field against the Persians, the
      Germans, and the Sarmatians. Be silent in the presence of your
      sovereign and benefactor, who bestows upon you the corn, the
      clothing, and the money of the provinces. Be silent, or I shall
      no longer style you solders, but _citizens_, 77 if those indeed
      who disclaim the laws of Rome deserve to be ranked among the
      meanest of the people.” His menaces inflamed the fury of the
      legion, and their brandished arms already threatened his person.
      “Your courage,” resumed the intrepid Alexander, “would be more
      nobly displayed in the field of battle; _me_ you may destroy, you
      cannot intimidate; and the severe justice of the republic would
      punish your crime and revenge my death.” The legion still
      persisted in clamorous sedition, when the emperor pronounced,
      with a loud voice, the decisive sentence, “_Citizens!_ lay down
      your arms, and depart in peace to your respective habitations.”
      The tempest was instantly appeased: the soldiers, filled with
      grief and shame, silently confessed the justice of their
      punishment, and the power of discipline, yielded up their arms
      and military ensigns, and retired in confusion, not to their
      camp, but to the several inns of the city. Alexander enjoyed,
      during thirty days, the edifying spectacle of their repentance;
      nor did he restore them to their former rank in the army, till he
      had punished with death those tribunes whose connivance had
      occasioned the mutiny. The grateful legion served the emperor
      whilst living, and revenged him when dead. 78


      76 (return) [ Annot. Reimar. ad Dion Cassius, l. lxxx. p. 1369.]


      77 (return) [ Julius Cæsar had appeased a sedition with the same
      word, Quirites; which, thus opposed to soldiers, was used in a
      sense of contempt, and reduced the offenders to the less
      honorable condition of mere citizens. Tacit. Annal. i. 43.]


      78 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 132.]


      The resolutions of the multitude generally depend on a moment;
      and the caprice of passion might equally determine the seditious
      legion to lay down their arms at the emperor’s feet, or to plunge
      them into his breast. Perhaps, if this singular transaction had
      been investigated by the penetration of a philosopher, we should
      discover the secret causes which on that occasion authorized the
      boldness of the prince, and commanded the obedience of the
      troops; and perhaps, if it had been related by a judicious
      historian, we should find this action, worthy of Cæsar himself,
      reduced nearer to the level of probability and the common
      standard of the character of Alexander Severus. The abilities of
      that amiable prince seem to have been inadequate to the
      difficulties of his situation, the firmness of his conduct
      inferior to the purity of his intentions. His virtues, as well as
      the vices of Elagabalus, contracted a tincture of weakness and
      effeminacy from the soft climate of Syria, of which he was a
      native; though he blushed at his foreign origin, and listened
      with a vain complacency to the flattering genealogists, who
      derived his race from the ancient stock of Roman nobility. 79 The
      pride and avarice of his mother cast a shade on the glories of
      his reign; and by exacting from his riper years the same dutiful
      obedience which she had justly claimed from his unexperienced
      youth, Mamæa exposed to public ridicule both her son’s character
      and her own. 80 The fatigues of the Persian war irritated the
      military discontent; the unsuccessful event 801 degraded the
      reputation of the emperor as a general, and even as a soldier.
      Every cause prepared, and every circumstance hastened, a
      revolution, which distracted the Roman empire with a long series
      of intestine calamities.


      79 (return) [ From the Metelli. Hist. August. p. 119. The choice
      was judicious. In one short period of twelve years, the Metelli
      could reckon seven consulships and five triumphs. See Velleius
      Paterculus, ii. 11, and the Fasti.]


      80 (return) [ The life of Alexander, in the Augustan History, is
      the mere idea of a perfect prince, an awkward imitation of the
      Cyropædia. The account of his reign, as given by Herodian, is
      rational and moderate, consistent with the general history of the
      age; and, in some of the most invidious particulars, confirmed by
      the decisive fragments of Dion. Yet from a very paltry prejudice,
      the greater number of our modern writers abuse Herodian, and copy
      the Augustan History. See Mess de Tillemont and Wotton. From the
      opposite prejudice, the emperor Julian (in Cæsarib. p. 315)
      dwells with a visible satisfaction on the effeminate weakness of
      the Syrian, and the ridiculous avarice of his mother.]


      801 (return) [ Historians are divided as to the success of the
      campaign against the Persians; Herodian alone speaks of defeat.
      Lampridius, Eutropius, Victor, and others, say that it was very
      glorious to Alexander; that he beat Artaxerxes in a great battle,
      and repelled him from the frontiers of the empire. This much is
      certain, that Alexander, on his return to Rome, (Lamp. Hist. Aug.
      c. 56, 133, 134,) received the honors of a triumph, and that he
      said, in his oration to the people. Quirites, vicimus Persas,
      milites divites reduximus, vobis congiarium pollicemur, cras
      ludos circenses Persicos donabimus. Alexander, says Eckhel, had
      too much modesty and wisdom to permit himself to receive honors
      which ought only to be the reward of victory, if he had not
      deserved them; he would have contented himself with dissembling
      his losses. Eckhel, Doct. Num. vet. vii. 276. The medals
      represent him as in triumph; one, among others, displays him
      crowned by Victory between two rivers, the Euphrates and the
      Tigris. P. M. TR. P. xii. Cos. iii. PP. Imperator paludatus D.
      hastam. S. parazonium, stat inter duos fluvios humi jacentes, et
      ab accedente retro Victoria coronatur. Æ. max. mod. (Mus. Reg.
      Gall.) Although Gibbon treats this question more in detail when
      he speaks of the Persian monarchy, I have thought fit to place
      here what contradicts his opinion.—G]


      The dissolute tyranny of Commodus, the civil wars occasioned by
      his death, and the new maxims of policy introduced by the house
      of Severus, had all contributed to increase the dangerous power
      of the army, and to obliterate the faint image of laws and
      liberty that was still impressed on the minds of the Romans. The
      internal change, which undermined the foundations of the empire,
      we have endeavored to explain with some degree of order and
      perspicuity. The personal characters of the emperors, their
      victories, laws, follies, and fortunes, can interest us no
      farther than as they are connected with the general history of
      the Decline and Fall of the monarchy. Our constant attention to
      that great object will not suffer us to overlook a most important
      edict of Antoninus Caracalla, which communicated to all the free
      inhabitants of the empire the name and privileges of Roman
      citizens. His unbounded liberality flowed not, however, from the
      sentiments of a generous mind; it was the sordid result of
      avarice, and will naturally be illustrated by some observations
      on the finances of that state, from the victorious ages of the
      commonwealth to the reign of Alexander Severus.


      The siege of Veii in Tuscany, the first considerable enterprise
      of the Romans, was protracted to the tenth year, much less by the
      strength of the place than by the unskilfulness of the besiegers.
      The unaccustomed hardships of so many winter campaigns, at the
      distance of near twenty miles from home, 81 required more than
      common encouragements; and the senate wisely prevented the
      clamors of the people, by the institution of a regular pay for
      the soldiers, which was levied by a general tribute, assessed
      according to an equitable proportion on the property of the
      citizens. 82 During more than two hundred years after the
      conquest of Veii, the victories of the republic added less to the
      wealth than to the power of Rome. The states of Italy paid their
      tribute in military service only, and the vast force, both by sea
      and land, which was exerted in the Punic wars, was maintained at
      the expense of the Romans themselves. That high-spirited people
      (such is often the generous enthusiasm of freedom) cheerfully
      submitted to the most excessive but voluntary burdens, in the
      just confidence that they should speedily enjoy the rich harvest
      of their labors. Their expectations were not disappointed. In the
      course of a few years, the riches of Syracuse, of Carthage, of
      Macedonia, and of Asia, were brought in triumph to Rome. The
      treasures of Perseus alone amounted to near two millions
      sterling, and the Roman people, the sovereign of so many nations,
      was forever delivered from the weight of taxes. 83 The increasing
      revenue of the provinces was found sufficient to defray the
      ordinary establishment of war and government, and the superfluous
      mass of gold and silver was deposited in the temple of Saturn,
      and reserved for any unforeseen emergency of the state. 84


      81 (return) [ According to the more accurate Dionysius, the city
      itself was only a hundred stadia, or twelve miles and a half,
      from Rome, though some out-posts might be advanced farther on the
      side of Etruria. Nardini, in a professed treatise, has combated
      the popular opinion and the authority of two popes, and has
      removed Veii from Civita Castellana, to a little spot called
      Isola, in the midway between Rome and the Lake Bracianno. * Note:
      See the interesting account of the site and ruins of Veii in Sir
      W Gell’s topography of Rome and its Vicinity. v. ii. p. 303.—M.]


      82 (return) [ See the 4th and 5th books of Livy. In the Roman
      census, property, power, and taxation were commensurate with each
      other.]


      83 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. l. xxxiii. c. 3. Cicero de
      Offic. ii. 22. Plutarch, P. Æmil. p. 275.]


      84 (return) [ See a fine description of this accumulated wealth
      of ages in Phars. l. iii. v. 155, &c.]


      History has never, perhaps, suffered a greater or more
      irreparable injury than in the loss of the curious register 841
      bequeathed by Augustus to the senate, in which that experienced
      prince so accurately balanced the revenues and expenses of the
      Roman empire. 85 Deprived of this clear and comprehensive
      estimate, we are reduced to collect a few imperfect hints from
      such of the ancients as have accidentally turned aside from the
      splendid to the more useful parts of history. We are informed
      that, by the conquests of Pompey, the tributes of Asia were
      raised from fifty to one hundred and thirty-five millions of
      drachms; or about four millions and a half sterling. 86 861 Under
      the last and most indolent of the Ptolemies, the revenue of Egypt
      is said to have amounted to twelve thousand five hundred talents;
      a sum equivalent to more than two millions and a half of our
      money, but which was afterwards considerably improved by the more
      exact economy of the Romans, and the increase of the trade of
      Æthiopia and India. 87 Gaul was enriched by rapine, as Egypt was
      by commerce, and the tributes of those two great provinces have
      been compared as nearly equal to each other in value. 88 The ten
      thousand Euboic or Phœnician talents, about four millions
      sterling, 89 which vanquished Carthage was condemned to pay
      within the term of fifty years, were a slight acknowledgment of
      the superiority of Rome, 90 and cannot bear the least proportion
      with the taxes afterwards raised both on the lands and on the
      persons of the inhabitants, when the fertile coast of Africa was
      reduced into a province. 91


      841 (return) [ See Rationarium imperii. Compare besides Tacitus,
      Suet. Aug. c. ult. Dion, p. 832. Other emperors kept and
      published similar registers. See a dissertation of Dr. Wolle, de
      Rationario imperii Rom. Leipsig, 1773. The last book of Appian
      also contained the statistics of the Roman empire, but it is
      lost.—W.]


      85 (return) [ Tacit. in Annal. i. ll. It seems to have existed in
      the time of Appian.]


      86 (return) [ Plutarch, in Pompeio, p. 642.]


      861 (return) [ Wenck contests the accuracy of Gibbon’s version of
      Plutarch, and supposes that Pompey only raised the revenue from
      50,000,000 to 85,000,000 of drachms; but the text of Plutarch
      seems clearly to mean that his conquests added 85,000,000 to the
      ordinary revenue. Wenck adds, “Plutarch says in another part,
      that Antony made Asia pay, at one time, 200,000 talents, that is
      to say, 38,875,000 L. sterling.” But Appian explains this by
      saying that it was the revenue of ten years, which brings the
      annual revenue, at the time of Antony, to 3,875,000 L.
      sterling.—M.]


      87 (return) [ Strabo, l. xvii. p. 798.]


      88 (return) [ Velleius Paterculus, l. ii. c. 39. He seems to give
      the preference to the revenue of Gaul.]


      89 (return) [ The Euboic, the Phœnician, and the Alexandrian
      talents were double in weight to the Attic. See Hooper on ancient
      weights and measures, p. iv. c. 5. It is very probable that the
      same talent was carried from Tyre to Carthage.]


      90 (return) [ Polyb. l. xv. c. 2.]


      91 (return) [ Appian in Punicis, p. 84.]


      Spain, by a very singular fatality, was the Peru and Mexico of
      the old world. The discovery of the rich western continent by the
      Phœnicians, and the oppression of the simple natives, who were
      compelled to labor in their own mines for the benefit of
      strangers, form an exact type of the more recent history of
      Spanish America. 92 The Phœnicians were acquainted only with the
      sea-coast of Spain; avarice, as well as ambition, carried the
      arms of Rome and Carthage into the heart of the country, and
      almost every part of the soil was found pregnant with copper,
      silver, and gold. 921 Mention is made of a mine near Carthagena
      which yielded every day twenty-five thousand drachmns of silver,
      or about three hundred thousand pounds a year. 93 Twenty thousand
      pound weight of gold was annually received from the provinces of
      Asturia, Gallicia, and Lusitania. 94


      92 (return) [ Diodorus Siculus, l. 5. Oadiz was built by the
      Phœnicians a little more than a thousand years before Christ. See
      Vell. Pa ter. i.2.]


      921 (return) [ Compare Heeren’s Researches vol. i. part ii. p.]


      93 (return) [ Strabo, l. iii. p. 148.]


      94 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. l. xxxiii. c. 3. He mentions
      likewise a silver mine in Dalmatia, that yielded every day fifty
      pounds to the state.] We want both leisure and materials to
      pursue this curious inquiry through the many potent states that
      were annihilated in the Roman empire. Some notion, however, may
      be formed of the revenue of the provinces where considerable
      wealth had been deposited by nature, or collected by man, if we
      observe the severe attention that was directed to the abodes of
      solitude and sterility. Augustus once received a petition from
      the inhabitants of Gyarus, humbly praying that they might be
      relieved from one third of their excessive impositions. Their
      whole tax amounted indeed to no more than one hundred and fifty
      drachms, or about five pounds: but Gyarus was a little island, or
      rather a rock, of the Ægean Sea, destitute of fresh water and
      every necessary of life, and inhabited only by a few wretched
      fishermen. 95


      95 (return) [ Strabo, l. x. p. 485. Tacit. Annal. iu. 69, and iv.
      30. See Tournefort (Voyages au Levant, Lettre viii.) a very
      lively picture of the actual misery of Gyarus.]


      From the faint glimmerings of such doubtful and scattered lights,
      we should be inclined to believe, 1st, That (with every fair
      allowance for the differences of times and circumstances) the
      general income of the Roman provinces could seldom amount to less
      than fifteen or twenty millions of our money; 96 and, 2dly, That
      so ample a revenue must have been fully adequate to all the
      expenses of the moderate government instituted by Augustus, whose
      court was the modest family of a private senator, and whose
      military establishment was calculated for the defence of the
      frontiers, without any aspiring views of conquest, or any serious
      apprehension of a foreign invasion.


      96 (return) [ Lipsius de magnitudine Romana (l. ii. c. 3)
      computes the revenue at one hundred and fifty millions of gold
      crowns; but his whole book, though learned and ingenious, betrays
      a very heated imagination. Note: If Justus Lipsius has
      exaggerated the revenue of the Roman empire Gibbon, on the other
      hand, has underrated it. He fixes it at fifteen or twenty
      millions of our money. But if we take only, on a moderate
      calculation, the taxes in the provinces which he has already
      cited, they will amount, considering the augmentations made by
      Augustus, to nearly that sum. There remain also the provinces of
      Italy, of Rhætia, of Noricum, Pannonia, and Greece, &c., &c. Let
      us pay attention, besides, to the prodigious expenditure of some
      emperors, (Suet. Vesp. 16;) we shall see that such a revenue
      could not be sufficient. The authors of the Universal History,
      part xii., assign forty millions sterling as the sum to about
      which the public revenue might amount.—G. from W.]


      Notwithstanding the seeming probability of both these
      conclusions, the latter of them at least is positively disowned
      by the language and conduct of Augustus. It is not easy to
      determine whether, on this occasion, he acted as the common
      father of the Roman world, or as the oppressor of liberty;
      whether he wished to relieve the provinces, or to impoverish the
      senate and the equestrian order. But no sooner had he assumed the
      reins of government, than he frequently intimated the
      insufficiency of the tributes, and the necessity of throwing an
      equitable proportion of the public burden upon Rome and Italy.
      961 In the prosecution of this unpopular design, he advanced,
      however, by cautious and well-weighed steps. The introduction of
      customs was followed by the establishment of an excise, and the
      scheme of taxation was completed by an artful assessment on the
      real and personal property of the Roman citizens, who had been
      exempted from any kind of contribution above a century and a
      half.


      961 (return) [ It is not astonishing that Augustus held this
      language. The senate declared also under Nero, that the state
      could not exist without the imposts as well augmented as founded
      by Augustus. Tac. Ann. xiii. 50. After the abolition of the
      different tributes paid by Italy, an abolition which took place
      A. U. 646, 694, and 695, the state derived no revenues from that
      great country, but the twentieth part of the manumissions,
      (vicesima manumissionum,) and Ciero laments this in many places,
      particularly in his epistles to ii. 15.—G. from W.]


      I. In a great empire like that of Rome, a natural balance of
      money must have gradually established itself. It has been already
      observed, that as the wealth of the provinces was attracted to
      the capital by the strong hand of conquest and power, so a
      considerable part of it was restored to the industrious provinces
      by the gentle influence of commerce and arts. In the reign of
      Augustus and his successors, duties were imposed on every kind of
      merchandise, which through a thousand channels flowed to the
      great centre of opulence and luxury; and in whatsoever manner the
      law was expressed, it was the Roman purchaser, and not the
      provincial merchant, who paid the tax. 97 The rate of the customs
      varied from the eighth to the fortieth part of the value of the
      commodity; and we have a right to suppose that the variation was
      directed by the unalterable maxims of policy; that a higher duty
      was fixed on the articles of luxury than on those of necessity,
      and that the productions raised or manufactured by the labor of
      the subjects of the empire were treated with more indulgence than
      was shown to the pernicious, or at least the unpopular, commerce
      of Arabia and India. 98 There is still extant a long but
      imperfect catalogue of eastern commodities, which about the time
      of Alexander Severus were subject to the payment of duties;
      cinnamon, myrrh, pepper, ginger, and the whole tribe of
      aromatics; a great variety of precious stones, among which the
      diamond was the most remarkable for its price, and the emerald
      for its beauty; 99 Parthian and Babylonian leather, cottons,
      silks, both raw and manufactured, ebony ivory, and eunuchs. 100
      We may observe that the use and value of those effeminate slaves
      gradually rose with the decline of the empire.


      97 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xiii. 31. * Note: The customs
      (portoria) existed in the times of the ancient kings of Rome.
      They were suppressed in Italy, A. U. 694, by the Prætor, Cecilius
      Matellus Nepos. Augustus only reestablished them. See note
      above.—W.]



      98 (return) [See Pliny, (Hist. Natur. l. vi. c. 23, lxii. c. 18.)
      His observation that the Indian commodities were sold at Rome at
      a hundred times their original price, may give us some notion of
      the produce of the customs, since that original price amounted to
      more than eight hundred thousand pounds.]


      99 (return) [ The ancients were unacquainted with the art of
      cutting diamonds.]


      100 (return) [ M. Bouchaud, in his treatise de l’Impot chez les
      Romains, has transcribed this catalogue from the Digest, and
      attempts to illustrate it by a very prolix commentary. * Note: In
      the Pandects, l. 39, t. 14, de Publican. Compare Cicero in
      Verrem. c. 72—74.—W.]


      II. The excise, introduced by Augustus after the civil wars, was
      extremely moderate, but it was general. It seldom exceeded one
      _per cent_.; but it comprehended whatever was sold in the markets
      or by public auction, from the most considerable purchases of
      lands and houses, to those minute objects which can only derive a
      value from their infinite multitude and daily consumption. Such a
      tax, as it affects the body of the people, has ever been the
      occasion of clamor and discontent. An emperor well acquainted
      with the wants and resources of the state was obliged to declare,
      by a public edict, that the support of the army depended in a
      great measure on the produce of the excise. 101


      101 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. i. 78. Two years afterwards, the
      reduction of the poor kingdom of Cappadocia gave Tiberius a
      pretence for diminishing the excise of one half, but the relief
      was of very short duration.]


      III. When Augustus resolved to establish a permanent military
      force for the defence of his government against foreign and
      domestic enemies, he instituted a peculiar treasury for the pay
      of the soldiers, the rewards of the veterans, and the
      extra-ordinary expenses of war. The ample revenue of the excise,
      though peculiarly appropriated to those uses, was found
      inadequate. To supply the deficiency, the emperor suggested a new
      tax of five per cent. on all legacies and inheritances. But the
      nobles of Rome were more tenacious of property than of freedom.
      Their indignant murmurs were received by Augustus with his usual
      temper. He candidly referred the whole business to the senate,
      and exhorted them to provide for the public service by some other
      expedient of a less odious nature. They were divided and
      perplexed. He insinuated to them, that their obstinacy would
      oblige him to _propose_ a general land tax and capitation. They
      acquiesced in silence. 102 The new imposition on legacies and
      inheritances was, however, mitigated by some restrictions. It did
      not take place unless the object was of a certain value, most
      probably of fifty or a hundred pieces of gold; 103 nor could it
      be exacted from the nearest of kin on the father’s side. 104 When
      the rights of nature and poverty were thus secured, it seemed
      reasonable, that a stranger, or a distant relation, who acquired
      an unexpected accession of fortune, should cheerfully resign a
      twentieth part of it, for the benefit of the state. 105


      102 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lv. p. 794, l. lvi. p. 825. Note:
      Dion neither mentions this proposition nor the capitation. He
      only says that the emperor imposed a tax upon landed property,
      and sent every where men employed to make a survey, without
      fixing how much, and for how much each was to pay. The senators
      then preferred giving the tax on legacies and inheritances.—W.]


      103 (return) [ The sum is only fixed by conjecture.]


      104 (return) [ As the Roman law subsisted for many ages, the
      Cognati, or relations on the mother’s side, were not called to
      the succession. This harsh institution was gradually undermined
      by humanity, and finally abolished by Justinian.]


      105 (return) [ Plin. Panegyric. c. 37.]


      Such a tax, plentiful as it must prove in every wealthy
      community, was most happily suited to the situation of the
      Romans, who could frame their arbitrary wills, according to the
      dictates of reason or caprice, without any restraint from the
      modern fetters of entails and settlements. From various causes,
      the partiality of paternal affection often lost its influence
      over the stern patriots of the commonwealth, and the dissolute
      nobles of the empire; and if the father bequeathed to his son the
      fourth part of his estate, he removed all ground of legal
      complaint. 106 But a rich childish old man was a domestic tyrant,
      and his power increased with his years and infirmities. A servile
      crowd, in which he frequently reckoned prætors and consuls,
      courted his smiles, pampered his avarice, applauded his follies,
      served his passions, and waited with impatience for his death.
      The arts of attendance and flattery were formed into a most
      lucrative science; those who professed it acquired a peculiar
      appellation; and the whole city, according to the lively
      descriptions of satire, was divided between two parties, the
      hunters and their game. 107 Yet, while so many unjust and
      extravagant wills were every day dictated by cunning and
      subscribed by folly, a few were the result of rational esteem and
      virtuous gratitude. Cicero, who had so often defended the lives
      and fortunes of his fellow-citizens, was rewarded with legacies
      to the amount of a hundred and seventy thousand pounds; 108 nor
      do the friends of the younger Pliny seem to have been less
      generous to that amiable orator. 109 Whatever was the motive of
      the testator, the treasury claimed, without distinction, the
      twentieth part of his estate: and in the course of two or three
      generations, the whole property of the subject must have
      gradually passed through the coffers of the state.


      106 (return) [ See Heineccius in the Antiquit. Juris Romani, l.
      ii.]


      107 (return) [ Horat. l. ii. Sat. v. Potron. c. 116, &c. Plin. l.
      ii. Epist. 20.]


      108 (return) [ Cicero in Philip. ii. c. 16.]


      109 (return) [ See his epistles. Every such will gave him an
      occasion of displaying his reverence to the dead, and his justice
      to the living. He reconciled both in his behavior to a son who
      had been disinherited by his mother, (v.l.)]


      In the first and golden years of the reign of Nero, that prince,
      from a desire of popularity, and perhaps from a blind impulse of
      benevolence, conceived a wish of abolishing the oppression of the
      customs and excise. The wisest senators applauded his
      magnanimity: but they diverted him from the execution of a design
      which would have dissolved the strength and resources of the
      republic. 110 Had it indeed been possible to realize this dream
      of fancy, such princes as Trajan and the Antonines would surely
      have embraced with ardor the glorious opportunity of conferring
      so signal an obligation on mankind. Satisfied, however, with
      alleviating the public burden, they attempted not to remove it.
      The mildness and precision of their laws ascertained the rule and
      measure of taxation, and protected the subject of every rank
      against arbitrary interpretations, antiquated claims, and the
      insolent vexation of the farmers of the revenue. 111 For it is
      somewhat singular, that, in every age, the best and wisest of the
      Roman governors persevered in this pernicious method of
      collecting the principal branches at least of the excise and
      customs. 112


      110 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xiii. 50. Esprit des Loix, l. xii.
      c. 19.]


      111 (return) [ See Pliny’s Panegyric, the Augustan History, and
      Burman de Vectigal. passim.]


      112 (return) [ The tributes (properly so called) were not farmed;
      since the good princes often remitted many millions of arrears.]


      The sentiments, and, indeed, the situation, of Caracalla were
      very different from those of the Antonines. Inattentive, or
      rather averse, to the welfare of his people, he found himself
      under the necessity of gratifying the insatiate avarice which he
      had excited in the army. Of the several impositions introduced by
      Augustus, the twentieth on inheritances and legacies was the most
      fruitful, as well as the most comprehensive. As its influence was
      not confined to Rome or Italy, the produce continually increased
      with the gradual extension of the Roman City. The new citizens,
      though charged, on equal terms, 113 with the payment of new
      taxes, which had not affected them as subjects, derived an ample
      compensation from the rank they obtained, the privileges they
      acquired, and the fair prospect of honors and fortune that was
      thrown open to their ambition. But the favor which implied a
      distinction was lost in the prodigality of Caracalla, and the
      reluctant provincials were compelled to assume the vain title,
      and the real obligations, of Roman citizens. 1131 Nor was the
      rapacious son of Severus contented with such a measure of
      taxation as had appeared sufficient to his moderate predecessors.
      Instead of a twentieth, he exacted a tenth of all legacies and
      inheritances; and during his reign (for the ancient proportion
      was restored after his death) he crushed alike every part of the
      empire under the weight of his iron sceptre. 114


      113 (return) [ The situation of the new citizens is minutely
      described by Pliny, (Panegyric, c. 37, 38, 39). Trajan published
      a law very much in their favor.]


      1131 (return) [ Gibbon has adopted the opinion of Spanheim and of
      Burman, which attributes to Caracalla this edict, which gave the
      right of the city to all the inhabitants of the provinces. This
      opinion may be disputed. Several passages of Spartianus, of
      Aurelius Victor, and of Aristides, attribute this edict to Marc.
      Aurelius. See a learned essay, entitled Joh. P. Mahneri Comm. de
      Marc. Aur. Antonino Constitutionis de Civitate Universo Orbi
      Romano data auctore. Halæ, 1772, 8vo. It appears that Marc.
      Aurelius made some modifications of this edict, which released
      the provincials from some of the charges imposed by the right of
      the city, and deprived them of some of the advantages which it
      conferred. Caracalla annulled these modifications.—W.]


      114 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxvii. p. 1295.]


      When all the provincials became liable to the peculiar
      impositions of Roman citizens, they seemed to acquire a legal
      exemption from the tributes which they had paid in their former
      condition of subjects. Such were not the maxims of government
      adopted by Caracalla and his pretended son. The old as well as
      the new taxes were, at the same time, levied in the provinces. It
      was reserved for the virtue of Alexander to relieve them in a
      great measure from this intolerable grievance, by reducing the
      tributes to a thirteenth part of the sum exacted at the time of
      his accession. 115 It is impossible to conjecture the motive that
      engaged him to spare so trifling a remnant of the public evil;
      but the noxious weed, which had not been totally eradicated,
      again sprang up with the most luxuriant growth, and in the
      succeeding age darkened the Roman world with its deadly shade. In
      the course of this history, we shall be too often summoned to
      explain the land tax, the capitation, and the heavy contributions
      of corn, wine, oil, and meat, which were exacted from the
      provinces for the use of the court, the army, and the capital.


      115 (return) [ He who paid ten aurei, the usual tribute, was
      charged with no more than the third part of an aureus, and
      proportional pieces of gold were coined by Alexander’s order.
      Hist. August. p. 127, with the commentary of Salmasius.]


      As long as Rome and Italy were respected as the centre of
      government, a national spirit was preserved by the ancient, and
      insensibly imbibed by the adopted, citizens. The principal
      commands of the army were filled by men who had received a
      liberal education, were well instructed in the advantages of laws
      and letters, and who had risen, by equal steps, through the
      regular succession of civil and military honors. 116 To their
      influence and example we may partly ascribe the modest obedience
      of the legions during the two first centuries of the Imperial
      history.


      116 (return) [ See the lives of Agricola, Vespasian, Trajan,
      Severus, and his three competitors; and indeed of all the eminent
      men of those times.]


      But when the last enclosure of the Roman constitution was
      trampled down by Caracalla, the separation of professions
      gradually succeeded to the distinction of ranks. The more
      polished citizens of the internal provinces were alone qualified
      to act as lawyers and magistrates. The rougher trade of arms was
      abandoned to the peasants and barbarians of the frontiers, who
      knew no country but their camp, no science but that of war, no
      civil laws, and scarcely those of military discipline. With
      bloody hands, savage manners, and desperate resolutions, they
      sometimes guarded, but much oftener subverted, the throne of the
      emperors.


      Chapter VII: Tyranny Of Maximin, Rebellion, Civil Wars, Death Of
      Maximin.—Part I.


The Elevation And Tyranny Of Maximin.—Rebellion In Africa And Italy,
Under The Authority Of The Senate.—Civil Wars And Seditions.—Violent
Deaths Of Maximin And His Son, Of Maximus And Balbinus, And Of The
Three Gordians.— Usurpation And Secular Games Of Philip.


      Of the various forms of government which have prevailed in the
      world, an hereditary monarchy seems to present the fairest scope
      for ridicule. Is it possible to relate without an indignant
      smile, that, on the father’s decease, the property of a nation,
      like that of a drove of oxen, descends to his infant son, as yet
      unknown to mankind and to himself; and that the bravest warriors
      and the wisest statesmen, relinquishing their natural right to
      empire, approach the royal cradle with bended knees and
      protestations of inviolable fidelity? Satire and declamation may
      paint these obvious topics in the most dazzling colors, but our
      more serious thoughts will respect a useful prejudice, that
      establishes a rule of succession, independent of the passions of
      mankind; and we shall cheerfully acquiesce in any expedient which
      deprives the multitude of the dangerous, and indeed the ideal,
      power of giving themselves a master.


      In the cool shade of retirement, we may easily devise imaginary
      forms of government, in which the sceptre shall be constantly
      bestowed on the most worthy, by the free and incorrupt suffrage
      of the whole community. Experience overturns these airy fabrics,
      and teaches us, that in a large society, the election of a
      monarch can never devolve to the wisest, or to the most numerous
      part of the people. The army is the only order of men
      sufficiently united to concur in the same sentiments, and
      powerful enough to impose them on the rest of their
      fellow-citizens; but the temper of soldiers, habituated at once
      to violence and to slavery, renders them very unfit guardians of
      a legal, or even a civil constitution. Justice, humanity, or
      political wisdom, are qualities they are too little acquainted
      with in themselves, to appreciate them in others. Valor will
      acquire their esteem, and liberality will purchase their
      suffrage; but the first of these merits is often lodged in the
      most savage breasts; the latter can only exert itself at the
      expense of the public; and both may be turned against the
      possessor of the throne, by the ambition of a daring rival.


      The superior prerogative of birth, when it has obtained the
      sanction of time and popular opinion, is the plainest and least
      invidious of all distinctions among mankind. The acknowledged
      right extinguishes the hopes of faction, and the conscious
      security disarms the cruelty of the monarch. To the firm
      establishment of this idea we owe the peaceful succession and
      mild administration of European monarchies. To the defect of it
      we must attribute the frequent civil wars, through which an
      Asiatic despot is obliged to cut his way to the throne of his
      fathers. Yet, even in the East, the sphere of contention is
      usually limited to the princes of the reigning house, and as soon
      as the more fortunate competitor has removed his brethren by the
      sword and the bowstring, he no longer entertains any jealousy of
      his meaner subjects. But the Roman empire, after the authority of
      the senate had sunk into contempt, was a vast scene of confusion.
      The royal, and even noble, families of the provinces had long
      since been led in triumph before the car of the haughty
      republicans. The ancient families of Rome had successively fallen
      beneath the tyranny of the Cæsars; and whilst those princes were
      shackled by the forms of a commonwealth, and disappointed by the
      repeated failure of their posterity, 1 it was impossible that any
      idea of hereditary succession should have taken root in the minds
      of their subjects. The right to the throne, which none could
      claim from birth, every one assumed from merit. The daring hopes
      of ambition were set loose from the salutary restraints of law
      and prejudice; and the meanest of mankind might, without folly,
      entertain a hope of being raised by valor and fortune to a rank
      in the army, in which a single crime would enable him to wrest
      the sceptre of the world from his feeble and unpopular master.
      After the murder of Alexander Severus, and the elevation of
      Maximin, no emperor could think himself safe upon the throne, and
      every barbarian peasant of the frontier might aspire to that
      august, but dangerous station.


      1 (return) [ There had been no example of three successive
      generations on the throne; only three instances of sons who
      succeeded their fathers. The marriages of the Cæsars
      (notwithstanding the permission, and the frequent practice of
      divorces) were generally unfruitful.]


      About thirty-two years before that event, the emperor Severus,
      returning from an eastern expedition, halted in Thrace, to
      celebrate, with military games, the birthday of his younger son,
      Geta. The country flocked in crowds to behold their sovereign,
      and a young barbarian of gigantic stature earnestly solicited, in
      his rude dialect, that he might be allowed to contend for the
      prize of wrestling. As the pride of discipline would have been
      disgraced in the overthrow of a Roman soldier by a Thracian
      peasant, he was matched with the stoutest followers of the camp,
      sixteen of whom he successively laid on the ground. His victory
      was rewarded by some trifling gifts, and a permission to enlist
      in the troops. The next day, the happy barbarian was
      distinguished above a crowd of recruits, dancing and exulting
      after the fashion of his country. As soon as he perceived that he
      had attracted the emperor’s notice, he instantly ran up to his
      horse, and followed him on foot, without the least appearance of
      fatigue, in a long and rapid career. “Thracian,” said Severus
      with astonishment, “art thou disposed to wrestle after thy race?”
      “Most willingly, sir,” replied the unwearied youth; and, almost
      in a breath, overthrew seven of the strongest soldiers in the
      army. A gold collar was the prize of his matchless vigor and
      activity, and he was immediately appointed to serve in the
      horseguards who always attended on the person of the sovereign. 2


      2 (return) [ Hist. August p. 138.]


      Maximin, for that was his name, though born on the territories of
      the empire, descended from a mixed race of barbarians. His father
      was a Goth, and his mother of the nation of the Alani. He
      displayed on every occasion a valor equal to his strength; and
      his native fierceness was soon tempered or disguised by the
      knowledge of the world. Under the reign of Severus and his son,
      he obtained the rank of centurion, with the favor and esteem of
      both those princes, the former of whom was an excellent judge of
      merit. Gratitude forbade Maximin to serve under the assassin of
      Caracalla. Honor taught him to decline the effeminate insults of
      Elagabalus. On the accession of Alexander he returned to court,
      and was placed by that prince in a station useful to the service,
      and honorable to himself. The fourth legion, to which he was
      appointed tribune, soon became, under his care, the best
      disciplined of the whole army. With the general applause of the
      soldiers, who bestowed on their favorite hero the names of Ajax
      and Hercules, he was successively promoted to the first military
      command; 3 and had not he still retained too much of his savage
      origin, the emperor might perhaps have given his own sister in
      marriage to the son of Maximin. 4


      3 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 140. Herodian, l. vi. p. 223.
      Aurelius Victor. By comparing these authors, it should seem that
      Maximin had the particular command of the Tribellian horse, with
      the general commission of disciplining the recruits of the whole
      army. His biographer ought to have marked, with more care, his
      exploits, and the successive steps of his military promotions.]


      4 (return) [ See the original letter of Alexander Severus, Hist.
      August. p. 149.]


      Instead of securing his fidelity, these favors served only to
      inflame the ambition of the Thracian peasant, who deemed his
      fortune inadequate to his merit, as long as he was constrained to
      acknowledge a superior. Though a stranger to real wisdom, he was
      not devoid of a selfish cunning, which showed him that the
      emperor had lost the affection of the army, and taught him to
      improve their discontent to his own advantage. It is easy for
      faction and calumny to shed their poison on the administration of
      the best of princes, and to accuse even their virtues by artfully
      confounding them with those vices to which they bear the nearest
      affinity. The troops listened with pleasure to the emissaries of
      Maximin. They blushed at their own ignominious patience, which,
      during thirteen years, had supported the vexatious discipline
      imposed by an effeminate Syrian, the timid slave of his mother
      and of the senate. It was time, they cried, to cast away that
      useless phantom of the civil power, and to elect for their prince
      and general a real soldier, educated in camps, exercised in war,
      who would assert the glory, and distribute among his companions
      the treasures, of the empire. A great army was at that time
      assembled on the banks of the Rhine, under the command of the
      emperor himself, who, almost immediately after his return from
      the Persian war, had been obliged to march against the barbarians
      of Germany. The important care of training and reviewing the new
      levies was intrusted to Maximin. One day, as he entered the field
      of exercise, the troops, either from a sudden impulse, or a
      formed conspiracy, saluted him emperor, silenced by their loud
      acclamations his obstinate refusal, and hastened to consummate
      their rebellion by the murder of Alexander Severus.


      The circumstances of his death are variously related. The
      writers, who suppose that he died in ignorance of the ingratitude
      and ambition of Maximin affirm that, after taking a frugal repast
      in the sight of the army, he retired to sleep, and that, about
      the seventh hour of the day, a part of his own guards broke into
      the imperial tent, and, with many wounds, assassinated their
      virtuous and unsuspecting prince. 5 If we credit another, and
      indeed a more probable account, Maximin was invested with the
      purple by a numerous detachment, at the distance of several miles
      from the head-quarters; and he trusted for success rather to the
      secret wishes than to the public declarations of the great army.
      Alexander had sufficient time to awaken a faint sense of loyalty
      among the troops; but their reluctant professions of fidelity
      quickly vanished on the appearance of Maximin, who declared
      himself the friend and advocate of the military order, and was
      unanimously acknowledged emperor of the Romans by the applauding
      legions. The son of Mamæa, betrayed and deserted, withdrew into
      his tent, desirous at least to conceal his approaching fate from
      the insults of the multitude. He was soon followed by a tribune
      and some centurions, the ministers of death; but instead of
      receiving with manly resolution the inevitable stroke, his
      unavailing cries and entreaties disgraced the last moments of his
      life, and converted into contempt some portion of the just pity
      which his innocence and misfortunes must inspire. His mother,
      Mamæa, whose pride and avarice he loudly accused as the cause of
      his ruin, perished with her son. The most faithful of his friends
      were sacrificed to the first fury of the soldiers. Others were
      reserved for the more deliberate cruelty of the usurper; and
      those who experienced the mildest treatment, were stripped of
      their employments, and ignominiously driven from the court and
      army. 6


      5 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 135. I have softened some of the
      most improbable circumstances of this wretched biographer. From
      his ill-worded narration, it should seem that the prince’s
      buffoon having accidentally entered the tent, and awakened the
      slumbering monarch, the fear of punishment urged him to persuade
      the disaffected soldiers to commit the murder.]


      6 (return) [ Herodian, l. vi. 223-227.]


      The former tyrants, Caligula and Nero, Commodus, and Caracalla,
      were all dissolute and unexperienced youths, 7 educated in the
      purple, and corrupted by the pride of empire, the luxury of Rome,
      and the perfidious voice of flattery. The cruelty of Maximin was
      derived from a different source, the fear of contempt. Though he
      depended on the attachment of the soldiers, who loved him for
      virtues like their own, he was conscious that his mean and
      barbarian origin, his savage appearance, and his total ignorance
      of the arts and institutions of civil life, 8 formed a very
      unfavorable contrast with the amiable manners of the unhappy
      Alexander. He remembered, that, in his humbler fortune, he had
      often waited before the door of the haughty nobles of Rome, and
      had been denied admittance by the insolence of their slaves. He
      recollected too the friendship of a few who had relieved his
      poverty, and assisted his rising hopes. But those who had
      spurned, and those who had protected, the Thracian, were guilty
      of the same crime, the knowledge of his original obscurity. For
      this crime many were put to death; and by the execution of
      several of his benefactors, Maximin published, in characters of
      blood, the indelible history of his baseness and ingratitude. 9


      7 (return) [ Caligula, the eldest of the four, was only
      twenty-five years of age when he ascended the throne; Caracalla
      was twenty-three, Commodus nineteen, and Nero no more than
      seventeen.]


      8 (return) [ It appears that he was totally ignorant of the Greek
      language; which, from its universal use in conversation and
      letters, was an essential part of every liberal education.]


      9 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 141. Herodian, l. vii. p. 237. The
      latter of these historians has been most unjustly censured for
      sparing the vices of Maximin.]


      The dark and sanguinary soul of the tyrant was open to every
      suspicion against those among his subjects who were the most
      distinguished by their birth or merit. Whenever he was alarmed
      with the sound of treason, his cruelty was unbounded and
      unrelenting. A conspiracy against his life was either discovered
      or imagined, and Magnus, a consular senator, was named as the
      principal author of it. Without a witness, without a trial, and
      without an opportunity of defence, Magnus, with four thousand of
      his supposed accomplices, was put to death. Italy and the whole
      empire were infested with innumerable spies and informers. On the
      slightest accusation, the first of the Roman nobles, who had
      governed provinces, commanded armies, and been adorned with the
      consular and triumphal ornaments, were chained on the public
      carriages, and hurried away to the emperor’s presence.
      Confiscation, exile, or simple death, were esteemed uncommon
      instances of his lenity. Some of the unfortunate sufferers he
      ordered to be sewed up in the hides of slaughtered animals,
      others to be exposed to wild beasts, others again to be beaten to
      death with clubs. During the three years of his reign, he
      disdained to visit either Rome or Italy. His camp, occasionally
      removed from the banks of the Rhine to those of the Danube, was
      the seat of his stern despotism, which trampled on every
      principle of law and justice, and was supported by the avowed
      power of the sword. 10 No man of noble birth, elegant
      accomplishments, or knowledge of civil business, was suffered
      near his person; and the court of a Roman emperor revived the
      idea of those ancient chiefs of slaves and gladiators, whose
      savage power had left a deep impression of terror and
      detestation. 11


      10 (return) [ The wife of Maximin, by insinuating wise counsels
      with female gentleness, sometimes brought back the tyrant to the
      way of truth and humanity. See Ammianus Marcellinus, l. xiv. c.
      l, where he alludes to the fact which he had more fully related
      under the reign of the Gordians. We may collect from the medals,
      that Paullina was the name of this benevolent empress; and from
      the title of Diva, that she died before Maximin. (Valesius ad
      loc. cit. Ammian.) Spanheim de U. et P. N. tom. ii. p. 300. Note:
      If we may believe Syrcellus and Zonaras, in was Maximin himself
      who ordered her death—G]


      11 (return) [ He was compared to Spartacus and Athenio. Hist.
      August p. 141.]


      As long as the cruelty of Maximin was confined to the illustrious
      senators, or even to the bold adventurers, who in the court or
      army expose themselves to the caprice of fortune, the body of the
      people viewed their sufferings with indifference, or perhaps with
      pleasure. But the tyrant’s avarice, stimulated by the insatiate
      desires of the soldiers, at length attacked the public property.
      Every city of the empire was possessed of an independent revenue,
      destined to purchase corn for the multitude, and to supply the
      expenses of the games and entertainments. By a single act of
      authority, the whole mass of wealth was at once confiscated for
      the use of the Imperial treasury. The temples were stripped of
      their most valuable offerings of gold and silver, and the statues
      of gods, heroes, and emperors, were melted down and coined into
      money. These impious orders could not be executed without tumults
      and massacres, as in many places the people chose rather to die
      in the defence of their altars, than to behold in the midst of
      peace their cities exposed to the rapine and cruelty of war. The
      soldiers themselves, among whom this sacrilegious plunder was
      distributed, received it with a blush; and hardened as they were
      in acts of violence, they dreaded the just reproaches of their
      friends and relations. Throughout the Roman world a general cry
      of indignation was heard, imploring vengeance on the common enemy
      of human kind; and at length, by an act of private oppression, a
      peaceful and unarmed province was driven into rebellion against
      him. 12


      12 (return) [ Herodian, l. vii. p. 238. Zosim. l. i. p. 15.]


      The procurator of Africa was a servant worthy of such a master,
      who considered the fines and confiscations of the rich as one of
      the most fruitful branches of the Imperial revenue. An iniquitous
      sentence had been pronounced against some opulent youths of that
      country, the execution of which would have stripped them of far
      the greater part of their patrimony. In this extremity, a
      resolution that must either complete or prevent their ruin, was
      dictated by despair. A respite of three days, obtained with
      difficulty from the rapacious treasurer, was employed in
      collecting from their estates a great number of slaves and
      peasants blindly devoted to the commands of their lords, and
      armed with the rustic weapons of clubs and axes. The leaders of
      the conspiracy, as they were admitted to the audience of the
      procurator, stabbed him with the daggers concealed under their
      garments, and, by the assistance of their tumultuary train,
      seized on the little town of Thysdrus, 13 and erected the
      standard of rebellion against the sovereign of the Roman empire.
      They rested their hopes on the hatred of mankind against Maximin,
      and they judiciously resolved to oppose to that detested tyrant
      an emperor whose mild virtues had already acquired the love and
      esteem of the Romans, and whose authority over the province would
      give weight and stability to the enterprise. Gordianus, their
      proconsul, and the object of their choice, refused, with
      unfeigned reluctance, the dangerous honor, and begged with tears,
      that they would suffer him to terminate in peace a long and
      innocent life, without staining his feeble age with civil blood.
      Their menaces compelled him to accept the Imperial purple, his
      only refuge, indeed, against the jealous cruelty of Maximin;
      since, according to the reasoning of tyrants, those who have been
      esteemed worthy of the throne deserve death, and those who
      deliberate have already rebelled. 14


      13 (return) [ In the fertile territory of Byzacium, one hundred
      and fifty miles to the south of Carthage. This city was
      decorated, probably by the Gordians, with the title of colony,
      and with a fine amphitheatre, which is still in a very perfect
      state. See Intinerar. Wesseling, p. 59; and Shaw’s Travels, p.
      117.]


      14 (return) [ Herodian, l. vii. p. 239. Hist. August. p. 153.]


      The family of Gordianus was one of the most illustrious of the
      Roman senate. On the father’s side he was descended from the
      Gracchi; on his mother’s, from the emperor Trajan. A great estate
      enabled him to support the dignity of his birth, and in the
      enjoyment of it, he displayed an elegant taste and beneficent
      disposition. The palace in Rome, formerly inhabited by the great
      Pompey, had been, during several generations, in the possession
      of Gordian’s family. 15 It was distinguished by ancient trophies
      of naval victories, and decorated with the works of modern
      painting. His villa on the road to Præneste was celebrated for
      baths of singular beauty and extent, for three stately rooms of a
      hundred feet in length, and for a magnificent portico, supported
      by two hundred columns of the four most curious and costly sorts
      of marble. 16 The public shows exhibited at his expense, and in
      which the people were entertained with many hundreds of wild
      beasts and gladiators, 17 seem to surpass the fortune of a
      subject; and whilst the liberality of other magistrates was
      confined to a few solemn festivals at Rome, the magnificence of
      Gordian was repeated, when he was ædile, every month in the year,
      and extended, during his consulship, to the principal cities of
      Italy. He was twice elevated to the last-mentioned dignity, by
      Caracalla and by Alexander; for he possessed the uncommon talent
      of acquiring the esteem of virtuous princes, without alarming the
      jealousy of tyrants. His long life was innocently spent in the
      study of letters and the peaceful honors of Rome; and, till he
      was named proconsul of Africa by the voice of the senate and the
      approbation of Alexander, 18 he appears prudently to have
      declined the command of armies and the government of provinces.
      181 As long as that emperor lived, Africa was happy under the
      administration of his worthy representative: after the barbarous
      Maximin had usurped the throne, Gordianus alleviated the miseries
      which he was unable to prevent. When he reluctantly accepted the
      purple, he was above fourscore years old; a last and valuable
      remains of the happy age of the Antonines, whose virtues he
      revived in his own conduct, and celebrated in an elegant poem of
      thirty books. With the venerable proconsul, his son, who had
      accompanied him into Africa as his lieutenant, was likewise
      declared emperor. His manners were less pure, but his character
      was equally amiable with that of his father. Twenty-two
      acknowledged concubines, and a library of sixty-two thousand
      volumes, attested the variety of his inclinations; and from the
      productions which he left behind him, it appears that the former
      as well as the latter were designed for use rather than for
      ostentation. 19 The Roman people acknowledged in the features of
      the younger Gordian the resemblance of Scipio Africanus, 191
      recollected with pleasure that his mother was the granddaughter
      of Antoninus Pius, and rested the public hope on those latent
      virtues which had hitherto, as they fondly imagined, lain
      concealed in the luxurious indolence of private life.


      15 (return) [ Hist. Aug. p. 152. The celebrated house of Pompey
      in carinis was usurped by Marc Antony, and consequently became,
      after the Triumvir’s death, a part of the Imperial domain. The
      emperor Trajan allowed, and even encouraged, the rich senators to
      purchase those magnificent and useless places, (Plin. Panegyric.
      c. 50;) and it may seem probable, that, on this occasion,
      Pompey’s house came into the possession of Gordian’s
      great-grandfather.]


      16 (return) [ The Claudian, the Numidian, the Carystian, and the
      Synnadian. The colors of Roman marbles have been faintly
      described and imperfectly distinguished. It appears, however,
      that the Carystian was a sea-green, and that the marble of
      Synnada was white mixed with oval spots of purple. See Salmasius
      ad Hist. August. p. 164.]


      17 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 151, 152. He sometimes gave five
      hundred pair of gladiators, never less than one hundred and
      fifty. He once gave for the use of the circus one hundred
      Sicilian, and as many Cappæcian Cappadecian horses. The animals
      designed for hunting were chiefly bears, boars, bulls, stags,
      elks, wild asses, &c. Elephants and lions seem to have been
      appropriated to Imperial magnificence.]


      18 (return) [ See the original letter, in the Augustan History,
      p. 152, which at once shows Alexander’s respect for the authority
      of the senate, and his esteem for the proconsul appointed by that
      assembly.]


      181 (return) [ Herodian expressly says that he had administered
      many provinces, lib. vii. 10.—W.]


      19 (return) [ By each of his concubines, the younger Gordian left
      three or four children. His literary productions, though less
      numerous, were by no means contemptible.]


      191 (return) [ Not the personal likeness, but the family descent
      from the Scipiod.—W.]


      As soon as the Gordians had appeased the first tumult of a
      popular election, they removed their court to Carthage. They were
      received with the acclamations of the Africans, who honored their
      virtues, and who, since the visit of Hadrian, had never beheld
      the majesty of a Roman emperor. But these vain acclamations
      neither strengthened nor confirmed the title of the Gordians.
      They were induced by principle, as well as interest, to solicit
      the approbation of the senate; and a deputation of the noblest
      provincials was sent, without delay, to Rome, to relate and
      justify the conduct of their countrymen, who, having long
      suffered with patience, were at length resolved to act with
      vigor. The letters of the new princes were modest and respectful,
      excusing the necessity which had obliged them to accept the
      Imperial title; but submitting their election and their fate to
      the supreme judgment of the senate. 20


      20 (return) [ Herodian, l. vii. p. 243. Hist. August. p. 144.]


      The inclinations of the senate were neither doubtful nor divided.
      The birth and noble alliances of the Gordians had intimately
      connected them with the most illustrious houses of Rome. Their
      fortune had created many dependants in that assembly, their merit
      had acquired many friends. Their mild administration opened the
      flattering prospect of the restoration, not only of the civil but
      even of the republican government. The terror of military
      violence, which had first obliged the senate to forget the murder
      of Alexander, and to ratify the election of a barbarian peasant,
      21 now produced a contrary effect, and provoked them to assert
      the injured rights of freedom and humanity. The hatred of Maximin
      towards the senate was declared and implacable; the tamest
      submission had not appeased his fury, the most cautious innocence
      would not remove his suspicions; and even the care of their own
      safety urged them to share the fortune of an enterprise, of which
      (if unsuccessful) they were sure to be the first victims. These
      considerations, and perhaps others of a more private nature, were
      debated in a previous conference of the consuls and the
      magistrates. As soon as their resolution was decided, they
      convoked in the temple of Castor the whole body of the senate,
      according to an ancient form of secrecy, 22 calculated to awaken
      their attention, and to conceal their decrees. “Conscript
      fathers,” said the consul Syllanus, “the two Gordians, both of
      consular dignity, the one your proconsul, the other your
      lieutenant, have been declared emperors by the general consent of
      Africa. Let us return thanks,” he boldly continued, “to the youth
      of Thysdrus; let us return thanks to the faithful people of
      Carthage, our generous deliverers from a horrid monster—Why do
      you hear me thus coolly, thus timidly? Why do you cast those
      anxious looks on each other? Why hesitate? Maximin is a public
      enemy! may his enmity soon expire with him, and may we long enjoy
      the prudence and felicity of Gordian the father, the valor and
      constancy of Gordian the son!” 23 The noble ardor of the consul
      revived the languid spirit of the senate. By a unanimous decree,
      the election of the Gordians was ratified, Maximin, his son, and
      his adherents, were pronounced enemies of their country, and
      liberal rewards were offered to whomsoever had the courage and
      good fortune to destroy them.


      21 (return) [ Quod. tamen patres dum periculosum existimant;
      inermes armato esistere approbaverunt.—Aurelius Victor.]


      22 (return) [ Even the servants of the house, the scribes, &c.,
      were excluded, and their office was filled by the senators
      themselves. We are obliged to the Augustan History. p. 159, for
      preserving this curious example of the old discipline of the
      commonwealth.]


      23 (return) [ This spirited speech, translated from the Augustan
      historian, p. 156, seems transcribed by him from the origina
      registers of the senate]


      During the emperor’s absence, a detachment of the Prætorian
      guards remained at Rome, to protect, or rather to command, the
      capital. The præfect Vitalianus had signalized his fidelity to
      Maximin, by the alacrity with which he had obeyed, and even
      prevented the cruel mandates of the tyrant. His death alone could
      rescue the authority of the senate, and the lives of the senators
      from a state of danger and suspense. Before their resolves had
      transpired, a quæstor and some tribunes were commissioned to take
      his devoted life. They executed the order with equal boldness and
      success; and, with their bloody daggers in their hands, ran
      through the streets, proclaiming to the people and the soldiers
      the news of the happy revolution. The enthusiasm of liberty was
      seconded by the promise of a large donative, in lands and money;
      the statues of Maximin were thrown down; the capital of the
      empire acknowledged, with transport, the authority of the two
      Gordians and the senate; 24 and the example of Rome was followed
      by the rest of Italy.


      24 (return) [ Herodian, l. vii. p. 244]


      A new spirit had arisen in that assembly, whose long patience had
      been insulted by wanton despotism and military license. The
      senate assumed the reins of government, and, with a calm
      intrepidity, prepared to vindicate by arms the cause of freedom.
      Among the consular senators recommended by their merit and
      services to the favor of the emperor Alexander, it was easy to
      select twenty, not unequal to the command of an army, and the
      conduct of a war. To these was the defence of Italy intrusted.
      Each was appointed to act in his respective department,
      authorized to enroll and discipline the Italian youth; and
      instructed to fortify the ports and highways, against the
      impending invasion of Maximin. A number of deputies, chosen from
      the most illustrious of the senatorian and equestrian orders,
      were despatched at the same time to the governors of the several
      provinces, earnestly conjuring them to fly to the assistance of
      their country, and to remind the nations of their ancient ties of
      friendship with the Roman senate and people. The general respect
      with which these deputies were received, and the zeal of Italy
      and the provinces in favor of the senate, sufficiently prove that
      the subjects of Maximin were reduced to that uncommon distress,
      in which the body of the people has more to fear from oppression
      than from resistance. The consciousness of that melancholy truth,
      inspires a degree of persevering fury, seldom to be found in
      those civil wars which are artificially supported for the benefit
      of a few factious and designing leaders. 25


      25 (return) [ Herodian, l. vii. p. 247, l. viii. p. 277. Hist.
      August. p 156-158.]


      For while the cause of the Gordians was embraced with such
      diffusive ardor, the Gordians themselves were no more. The feeble
      court of Carthage was alarmed by the rapid approach of
      Capelianus, governor of Mauritania, who, with a small band of
      veterans, and a fierce host of barbarians, attacked a faithful,
      but unwarlike province. The younger Gordian sallied out to meet
      the enemy at the head of a few guards, and a numerous
      undisciplined multitude, educated in the peaceful luxury of
      Carthage. His useless valor served only to procure him an
      honorable death on the field of battle. His aged father, whose
      reign had not exceeded thirty-six days, put an end to his life on
      the first news of the defeat. Carthage, destitute of defence,
      opened her gates to the conqueror, and Africa was exposed to the
      rapacious cruelty of a slave, obliged to satisfy his unrelenting
      master with a large account of blood and treasure. 26


      26 (return) [ Herodian, l. vii. p. 254. Hist. August. p. 150-160.
      We may observe, that one month and six days, for the reign of
      Gordian, is a just correction of Casaubon and Panvinius, instead
      of the absurd reading of one year and six months. See Commentar.
      p. 193. Zosimus relates, l. i. p. 17, that the two Gordians
      perished by a tempest in the midst of their navigation. A strange
      ignorance of history, or a strange abuse of metaphors!]


      The fate of the Gordians filled Rome with just but unexpected
      terror. The senate, convoked in the temple of Concord, affected
      to transact the common business of the day; and seemed to
      decline, with trembling anxiety, the consideration of their own
      and the public danger. A silent consternation prevailed in the
      assembly, till a senator, of the name and family of Trajan,
      awakened his brethren from their fatal lethargy. He represented
      to them that the choice of cautious, dilatory measures had been
      long since out of their power; that Maximin, implacable by
      nature, and exasperated by injuries, was advancing towards Italy,
      at the head of the military force of the empire; and that their
      only remaining alternative was either to meet him bravely in the
      field, or tamely to expect the tortures and ignominious death
      reserved for unsuccessful rebellion. “We have lost,” continued
      he, “two excellent princes; but unless we desert ourselves, the
      hopes of the republic have not perished with the Gordians. Many
      are the senators whose virtues have deserved, and whose abilities
      would sustain, the Imperial dignity. Let us elect two emperors,
      one of whom may conduct the war against the public enemy, whilst
      his colleague remains at Rome to direct the civil administration.
      I cheerfully expose myself to the danger and envy of the
      nomination, and give my vote in favor of Maximus and Balbinus.
      Ratify my choice, conscript fathers, or appoint in their place,
      others more worthy of the empire.” The general apprehension
      silenced the whispers of jealousy; the merit of the candidates
      was universally acknowledged; and the house resounded with the
      sincere acclamations of “Long life and victory to the emperors
      Maximus and Balbinus. You are happy in the judgment of the
      senate; may the republic be happy under your administration!” 27


      27 (return) [ See the Augustan History, p. 166, from the
      registers of the senate; the date is confessedly faulty but the
      coincidence of the Apollinatian games enables us to correct it.]


      Chapter VII: Tyranny Of Maximin, Rebellion, Civil Wars, Death Of
      Maximin.—Part II.


      The virtues and the reputation of the new emperors justified the
      most sanguine hopes of the Romans. The various nature of their
      talents seemed to appropriate to each his peculiar department of
      peace and war, without leaving room for jealous emulation.
      Balbinus was an admired orator, a poet of distinguished fame, and
      a wise magistrate, who had exercised with innocence and applause
      the civil jurisdiction in almost all the interior provinces of
      the empire. His birth was noble, 28 his fortune affluent, his
      manners liberal and affable. In him the love of pleasure was
      corrected by a sense of dignity, nor had the habits of ease
      deprived him of a capacity for business. The mind of Maximus was
      formed in a rougher mould. By his valor and abilities he had
      raised himself from the meanest origin to the first employments
      of the state and army. His victories over the Sarmatians and the
      Germans, the austerity of his life, and the rigid impartiality of
      his justice, while he was a Præfect of the city, commanded the
      esteem of a people whose affections were engaged in favor of the
      more amiable Balbinus. The two colleagues had both been consuls,
      (Balbinus had twice enjoyed that honorable office,) both had been
      named among the twenty lieutenants of the senate; and since the
      one was sixty and the other seventy-four years old, 29 they had
      both attained the full maturity of age and experience.


      28 (return) [ He was descended from Cornelius Balbus, a noble
      Spaniard, and the adopted son of Theophanes, the Greek historian.
      Balbus obtained the freedom of Rome by the favor of Pompey, and
      preserved it by the eloquence of Cicero. (See Orat. pro Cornel.
      Balbo.) The friendship of Cæsar, (to whom he rendered the most
      important secret services in the civil war) raised him to the
      consulship and the pontificate, honors never yet possessed by a
      stranger. The nephew of this Balbus triumphed over the
      Garamantes. See Dictionnaire de Bayle, au mot Balbus, where he
      distinguishes the several persons of that name, and rectifies,
      with his usual accuracy, the mistakes of former writers
      concerning them.]


      29 (return) [ Zonaras, l. xii. p. 622. But little dependence is
      to be had on the authority of a modern Greek, so grossly ignorant
      of the history of the third century, that he creates several
      imaginary emperors, and confounds those who really existed.]


      After the senate had conferred on Maximus and Balbinus an equal
      portion of the consular and tribunitian powers, the title of
      Fathers of their country, and the joint office of Supreme
      Pontiff, they ascended to the Capitol to return thanks to the
      gods, protectors of Rome. 30 The solemn rites of sacrifice were
      disturbed by a sedition of the people. The licentious multitude
      neither loved the rigid Maximus, nor did they sufficiently fear
      the mild and humane Balbinus. Their increasing numbers surrounded
      the temple of Jupiter; with obstinate clamors they asserted their
      inherent right of consenting to the election of their sovereign;
      and demanded, with an apparent moderation, that, besides the two
      emperors, chosen by the senate, a third should be added of the
      family of the Gordians, as a just return of gratitude to those
      princes who had sacrificed their lives for the republic. At the
      head of the city-guards, and the youth of the equestrian order,
      Maximus and Balbinus attempted to cut their way through the
      seditious multitude. The multitude, armed with sticks and stones,
      drove them back into the Capitol. It is prudent to yield when the
      contest, whatever may be the issue of it, must be fatal to both
      parties. A boy, only thirteen years of age, the grandson of the
      elder, and nephew 301 of the younger Gordian, was produced to the
      people, invested with the ornaments and title of Cæsar. The
      tumult was appeased by this easy condescension; and the two
      emperors, as soon as they had been peaceably acknowledged in
      Rome, prepared to defend Italy against the common enemy.


      30 (return) [ Herodian, l. vii. p. 256, supposes that the senate
      was at first convoked in the Capitol, and is very eloquent on the
      occasion. The Augustar History p. 116, seems much more
      authentic.]


      301 (return) [ According to some, the son.—G.]


      Whilst in Rome and Africa, revolutions succeeded each other with
      such amazing rapidity, that the mind of Maximin was agitated by
      the most furious passions. He is said to have received the news
      of the rebellion of the Gordians, and of the decree of the senate
      against him, not with the temper of a man, but the rage of a wild
      beast; which, as it could not discharge itself on the distant
      senate, threatened the life of his son, of his friends, and of
      all who ventured to approach his person. The grateful
      intelligence of the death of the Gordians was quickly followed by
      the assurance that the senate, laying aside all hopes of pardon
      or accommodation, had substituted in their room two emperors,
      with whose merit he could not be unacquainted. Revenge was the
      only consolation left to Maximin, and revenge could only be
      obtained by arms. The strength of the legions had been assembled
      by Alexander from all parts of the empire. Three successful
      campaigns against the Germans and the Sarmatians, had raised
      their fame, confirmed their discipline, and even increased their
      numbers, by filling the ranks with the flower of the barbarian
      youth. The life of Maximin had been spent in war, and the candid
      severity of history cannot refuse him the valor of a soldier, or
      even the abilities of an experienced general. 31 It might
      naturally be expected, that a prince of such a character, instead
      of suffering the rebellion to gain stability by delay, should
      immediately have marched from the banks of the Danube to those of
      the Tyber, and that his victorious army, instigated by contempt
      for the senate, and eager to gather the spoils of Italy, should
      have burned with impatience to finish the easy and lucrative
      conquest. Yet as far as we can trust to the obscure chronology of
      that period, 32 it appears that the operations of some foreign
      war deferred the Italian expedition till the ensuing spring. From
      the prudent conduct of Maximin, we may learn that the savage
      features of his character have been exaggerated by the pencil of
      party, that his passions, however impetuous, submitted to the
      force of reason, and that the barbarian possessed something of
      the generous spirit of Sylla, who subdued the enemies of Rome
      before he suffered himself to revenge his private injuries. 33


      31 (return) [ In Herodian, l. vii. p. 249, and in the Augustan
      History, we have three several orations of Maximin to his army,
      on the rebellion of Africa and Rome: M. de Tillemont has very
      justly observed that they neither agree with each other nor with
      truth. Histoire des Empereurs, tom. iii. p. 799.]


      32 (return) [ The carelessness of the writers of that age, leaves
      us in a singular perplexity. 1. We know that Maximus and Balbinus
      were killed during the Capitoline games. Herodian, l. viii. p.
      285. The authority of Censorinus (de Die Natali, c. 18) enables
      us to fix those games with certainty to the year 238, but leaves
      us in ignorance of the month or day. 2. The election of Gordian
      by the senate is fixed with equal certainty to the 27th of May;
      but we are at a loss to discover whether it was in the same or
      the preceding year. Tillemont and Muratori, who maintain the two
      opposite opinions, bring into the field a desultory troop of
      authorities, conjectures and probabilities. The one seems to draw
      out, the other to contract the series of events between those
      periods, more than can be well reconciled to reason and history.
      Yet it is necessary to choose between them. Note: Eckhel has more
      recently treated these chronological questions with a perspicuity
      which gives great probability to his conclusions. Setting aside
      all the historians, whose contradictions are irreconcilable, he
      has only consulted the medals, and has arranged the events before
      us in the following order:— Maximin, A. U. 990, after having
      conquered the Germans, reenters Pannonia, establishes his winter
      quarters at Sirmium, and prepares himself to make war against the
      people of the North. In the year 991, in the cal ends of January,
      commences his fourth tribunate. The Gordians are chosen emperors
      in Africa, probably at the beginning of the month of March. The
      senate confirms this election with joy, and declares Maximin the
      enemy of Rome. Five days after he had heard of this revolt,
      Maximin sets out from Sirmium on his march to Italy. These events
      took place about the beginning of April; a little after, the
      Gordians are slain in Africa by Capellianus, procurator of
      Mauritania. The senate, in its alarm, names as emperors Balbus
      and Maximus Pupianus, and intrusts the latter with the war
      against Maximin. Maximin is stopped on his road near Aquileia, by
      the want of provisions, and by the melting of the snows: he
      begins the siege of Aquileia at the end of April. Pupianus
      assembles his army at Ravenna. Maximin and his son are
      assassinated by the soldiers enraged at the resistance of
      Aquileia: and this was probably in the middle of May. Pupianus
      returns to Rome, and assumes the government with Balbinus; they
      are assassinated towards the end of July Gordian the younger
      ascends the throne. Eckhel de Doct. Vol vii 295.—G.]


      33 (return) [ Velleius Paterculus, l. ii. c. 24. The president de
      Montesquieu (in his dialogue between Sylla and Eucrates)
      expresses the sentiments of the dictator in a spirited, and even
      a sublime manner.]


      When the troops of Maximin, advancing in excellent order, arrived
      at the foot of the Julian Alps, they were terrified by the
      silence and desolation that reigned on the frontiers of Italy.
      The villages and open towns had been abandoned on their approach
      by the inhabitants, the cattle was driven away, the provisions
      removed or destroyed, the bridges broken down, nor was any thing
      left which could afford either shelter or subsistence to an
      invader. Such had been the wise orders of the generals of the
      senate: whose design was to protract the war, to ruin the army of
      Maximin by the slow operation of famine, and to consume his
      strength in the sieges of the principal cities of Italy, which
      they had plentifully stored with men and provisions from the
      deserted country. Aquileia received and withstood the first shock
      of the invasion. The streams that issue from the head of the
      Hadriatic Gulf, swelled by the melting of the winter snows, 34
      opposed an unexpected obstacle to the arms of Maximin. At length,
      on a singular bridge, constructed with art and difficulty, of
      large hogsheads, he transported his army to the opposite bank,
      rooted up the beautiful vineyards in the neighborhood of
      Aquileia, demolished the suburbs, and employed the timber of the
      buildings in the engines and towers, with which on every side he
      attacked the city. The walls, fallen to decay during the security
      of a long peace, had been hastily repaired on this sudden
      emergency: but the firmest defence of Aquileia consisted in the
      constancy of the citizens; all ranks of whom, instead of being
      dismayed, were animated by the extreme danger, and their
      knowledge of the tyrant’s unrelenting temper. Their courage was
      supported and directed by Crispinus and Menophilus, two of the
      twenty lieutenants of the senate, who, with a small body of
      regular troops, had thrown themselves into the besieged place.
      The army of Maximin was repulsed in repeated attacks, his
      machines destroyed by showers of artificial fire; and the
      generous enthusiasm of the Aquileians was exalted into a
      confidence of success, by the opinion that Belenus, their tutelar
      deity, combated in person in the defence of his distressed
      worshippers. 35


      34 (return) [ Muratori (Annali d’ Italia, tom. ii. p. 294) thinks
      the melting of the snows suits better with the months of June or
      July, than with those of February. The opinion of a man who
      passed his life between the Alps and the Apennines, is
      undoubtedly of great weight; yet I observe, 1. That the long
      winter, of which Muratori takes advantage, is to be found only in
      the Latin version, and not in the Greek text of Herodian. 2. That
      the vicissitudes of suns and rains, to which the soldiers of
      Maximin were exposed, (Herodian, l. viii. p. 277,) denote the
      spring rather than the summer. We may observe, likewise, that
      these several streams, as they melted into one, composed the
      Timavus, so poetically (in every sense of the word) described by
      Virgil. They are about twelve miles to the east of Aquileia. See
      Cluver. Italia Antiqua, tom. i. p. 189, &c.]


      35 (return) [ Herodian, l. viii. p. 272. The Celtic deity was
      supposed to be Apollo, and received under that name the thanks of
      the senate. A temple was likewise built to Venus the Bald, in
      honor of the women of Aquileia, who had given up their hair to
      make ropes for the military engines.]


      The emperor Maximus, who had advanced as far as Ravenna, to
      secure that important place, and to hasten the military
      preparations, beheld the event of the war in the more faithful
      mirror of reason and policy. He was too sensible, that a single
      town could not resist the persevering efforts of a great army;
      and he dreaded, lest the enemy, tired with the obstinate
      resistance of Aquileia, should on a sudden relinquish the
      fruitless siege, and march directly towards Rome. The fate of the
      empire and the cause of freedom must then be committed to the
      chance of a battle; and what arms could he oppose to the veteran
      legions of the Rhine and Danube? Some troops newly levied among
      the generous but enervated youth of Italy; and a body of German
      auxiliaries, on whose firmness, in the hour of trial, it was
      dangerous to depend. In the midst of these just alarms, the
      stroke of domestic conspiracy punished the crimes of Maximin, and
      delivered Rome and the senate from the calamities that would
      surely have attended the victory of an enraged barbarian.


      The people of Aquileia had scarcely experienced any of the common
      miseries of a siege; their magazines were plentifully supplied,
      and several fountains within the walls assured them of an
      inexhaustible resource of fresh water. The soldiers of Maximin
      were, on the contrary, exposed to the inclemency of the season,
      the contagion of disease, and the horrors of famine. The open
      country was ruined, the rivers filled with the slain, and
      polluted with blood. A spirit of despair and disaffection began
      to diffuse itself among the troops; and as they were cut off from
      all intelligence, they easily believed that the whole empire had
      embraced the cause of the senate, and that they were left as
      devoted victims to perish under the impregnable walls of
      Aquileia. The fierce temper of the tyrant was exasperated by
      disappointments, which he imputed to the cowardice of his army;
      and his wanton and ill-timed cruelty, instead of striking terror,
      inspired hatred, and a just desire of revenge. A party of
      Prætorian guards, who trembled for their wives and children in
      the camp of Alba, near Rome, executed the sentence of the senate.
      Maximin, abandoned by his guards, was slain in his tent, with his
      son (whom he had associated to the honors of the purple),
      Anulinus the præfect, and the principal ministers of his tyranny.
      36 The sight of their heads, borne on the point of spears,
      convinced the citizens of Aquileia that the siege was at an end;
      the gates of the city were thrown open, a liberal market was
      provided for the hungry troops of Maximin, and the whole army
      joined in solemn protestations of fidelity to the senate and the
      people of Rome, and to their lawful emperors Maximus and
      Balbinus. Such was the deserved fate of a brutal savage,
      destitute, as he has generally been represented, of every
      sentiment that distinguishes a civilized, or even a human being.
      The body was suited to the soul. The stature of Maximin exceeded
      the measure of eight feet, and circumstances almost incredible
      are related of his matchless strength and appetite. 37 Had he
      lived in a less enlightened age, tradition and poetry might well
      have described him as one of those monstrous giants, whose
      supernatural power was constantly exerted for the destruction of
      mankind.


      36 (return) [ Herodian, l. viii. p. 279. Hist. August. p. 146.
      The duration of Maximin’s reign has not been defined with much
      accuracy, except by Eutropius, who allows him three years and a
      few days, (l. ix. 1;) we may depend on the integrity of the text,
      as the Latin original is checked by the Greek version of
      Pæanius.]


      37 (return) [ Eight Roman feet and one third, which are equal to
      above eight English feet, as the two measures are to each other
      in the proportion of 967 to 1000. See Graves’s discourse on the
      Roman foot. We are told that Maximin could drink in a day an
      amphora (or about seven gallons) of wine, and eat thirty or forty
      pounds of meat. He could move a loaded wagon, break a horse’s leg
      with his fist, crumble stones in his hand, and tear up small
      trees by the roots. See his life in the Augustan History.]


      It is easier to conceive than to describe the universal joy of
      the Roman world on the fall of the tyrant, the news of which is
      said to have been carried in four days from Aquileia to Rome. The
      return of Maximus was a triumphal procession; his colleague and
      young Gordian went out to meet him, and the three princes made
      their entry into the capital, attended by the ambassadors of
      almost all the cities of Italy, saluted with the splendid
      offerings of gratitude and superstition, and received with the
      unfeigned acclamations of the senate and people, who persuaded
      themselves that a golden age would succeed to an age of iron. 38
      The conduct of the two emperors corresponded with these
      expectations. They administered justice in person; and the rigor
      of the one was tempered by the other’s clemency. The oppressive
      taxes with which Maximin had loaded the rights of inheritance and
      succession, were repealed, or at least moderated. Discipline was
      revived, and with the advice of the senate many wise laws were
      enacted by their imperial ministers, who endeavored to restore a
      civil constitution on the ruins of military tyranny. “What reward
      may we expect for delivering Rome from a monster?” was the
      question asked by Maximus, in a moment of freedom and confidence.


      Balbinus answered it without hesitation—“The love of the senate,
      of the people, and of all mankind.” “Alas!” replied his more
      penetrating colleague—“alas! I dread the hatred of the soldiers,
      and the fatal effects of their resentment.” 39 His apprehensions
      were but too well justified by the event.


      38 (return) [ See the congratulatory letter of Claudius Julianus,
      the consul to the two emperors, in the Augustan History.]


      39 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 171.]


      Whilst Maximus was preparing to defend Italy against the common
      foe, Balbinus, who remained at Rome, had been engaged in scenes
      of blood and intestine discord. Distrust and jealousy reigned in
      the senate; and even in the temples where they assembled, every
      senator carried either open or concealed arms. In the midst of
      their deliberations, two veterans of the guards, actuated either
      by curiosity or a sinister motive, audaciously thrust themselves
      into the house, and advanced by degrees beyond the altar of
      Victory. Gallicanus, a consular, and Mæcenas, a Prætorian
      senator, viewed with indignation their insolent intrusion:
      drawing their daggers, they laid the spies (for such they deemed
      them) dead at the foot of the altar, and then, advancing to the
      door of the senate, imprudently exhorted the multitude to
      massacre the Prætorians, as the secret adherents of the tyrant.
      Those who escaped the first fury of the tumult took refuge in the
      camp, which they defended with superior advantage against the
      reiterated attacks of the people, assisted by the numerous bands
      of gladiators, the property of opulent nobles. The civil war
      lasted many days, with infinite loss and confusion on both sides.
      When the pipes were broken that supplied the camp with water, the
      Prætorians were reduced to intolerable distress; but in their
      turn they made desperate sallies into the city, set fire to a
      great number of houses, and filled the streets with the blood of
      the inhabitants. The emperor Balbinus attempted, by ineffectual
      edicts and precarious truces, to reconcile the factions at Rome.
      But their animosity, though smothered for a while, burnt with
      redoubled violence. The soldiers, detesting the senate and the
      people, despised the weakness of a prince, who wanted either the
      spirit or the power to command the obedience of his subjects. 40


      40 (return) [ Herodian, l. viii. p. 258.]


      After the tyrant’s death, his formidable army had acknowledged,
      from necessity rather than from choice, the authority of Maximus,
      who transported himself without delay to the camp before
      Aquileia. As soon as he had received their oath of fidelity, he
      addressed them in terms full of mildness and moderation;
      lamented, rather than arraigned the wild disorders of the times,
      and assured the soldiers, that of all their past conduct the
      senate would remember only their generous desertion of the
      tyrant, and their voluntary return to their duty. Maximus
      enforced his exhortations by a liberal donative, purified the
      camp by a solemn sacrifice of expiation, and then dismissed the
      legions to their several provinces, impressed, as he hoped, with
      a lively sense of gratitude and obedience. 41 But nothing could
      reconcile the haughty spirit of the Prætorians. They attended the
      emperors on the memorable day of their public entry into Rome;
      but amidst the general acclamations, the sullen, dejected
      countenance of the guards sufficiently declared that they
      considered themselves as the object, rather than the partners, of
      the triumph. When the whole body was united in their camp, those
      who had served under Maximin, and those who had remained at Rome,
      insensibly communicated to each other their complaints and
      apprehensions. The emperors chosen by the army had perished with
      ignominy; those elected by the senate were seated on the throne.
      42 The long discord between the civil and military powers was
      decided by a war, in which the former had obtained a complete
      victory. The soldiers must now learn a new doctrine of submission
      to the senate; and whatever clemency was affected by that politic
      assembly, they dreaded a slow revenge, colored by the name of
      discipline, and justified by fair pretences of the public good.
      But their fate was still in their own hands; and if they had
      courage to despise the vain terrors of an impotent republic, it
      was easy to convince the world, that those who were masters of
      the arms, were masters of the authority, of the state.


      41 (return) [ Herodian, l. viii. p. 213.]


      42 (return) [ The observation had been made imprudently enough in
      the acclamations of the senate, and with regard to the soldiers
      it carried the appearance of a wanton insult. Hist. August. p.
      170.]


      When the senate elected two princes, it is probable that, besides
      the declared reason of providing for the various emergencies of
      peace and war, they were actuated by the secret desire of
      weakening by division the despotism of the supreme magistrate.
      Their policy was effectual, but it proved fatal both to their
      emperors and to themselves. The jealousy of power was soon
      exasperated by the difference of character. Maximus despised
      Balbinus as a luxurious noble, and was in his turn disdained by
      his colleague as an obscure soldier. Their silent discord was
      understood rather than seen; 43 but the mutual consciousness
      prevented them from uniting in any vigorous measures of defence
      against their common enemies of the Prætorian camp. The whole
      city was employed in the Capitoline games, and the emperors were
      left almost alone in the palace. On a sudden, they were alarmed
      by the approach of a troop of desperate assassins. Ignorant of
      each other’s situation or designs (for they already occupied very
      distant apartments), afraid to give or to receive assistance,
      they wasted the important moments in idle debates and fruitless
      recriminations. The arrival of the guards put an end to the vain
      strife. They seized on these emperors of the senate, for such
      they called them with malicious contempt, stripped them of their
      garments, and dragged them in insolent triumph through the
      streets of Rome, with the design of inflicting a slow and cruel
      death on these unfortunate princes. The fear of a rescue from the
      faithful Germans of the Imperial guards shortened their tortures;
      and their bodies, mangled with a thousand wounds, were left
      exposed to the insults or to the pity of the populace. 44


      43 (return) [ Discordiæ tacitæ, et quæ intelligerentur potius
      quam viderentur. _Hist. August_. p. 170. This well-chosen
      expression is probably stolen from some better writer.]


      44 (return) [ Herodian, l. viii. p. 287, 288.]


      In the space of a few months, six princes had been cut off by the
      sword. Gordian, who had already received the title of Cæsar, was
      the only person that occurred to the soldiers as proper to fill
      the vacant throne. 45 They carried him to the camp, and
      unanimously saluted him Augustus and Emperor. His name was dear
      to the senate and people; his tender age promised a long impunity
      of military license; and the submission of Rome and the provinces
      to the choice of the Prætorian guards saved the republic, at the
      expense indeed of its freedom and dignity, from the horrors of a
      new civil war in the heart of the capital. 46


      45 (return) [ Quia non alius erat in præsenti, is the expression
      of the Augustan History.]


      46 (return) [ Quintus Curtius (l. x. c. 9,) pays an elegant
      compliment to the emperor of the day, for having, by his happy
      accession, extinguished so many firebrands, sheathed so many
      swords, and put an end to the evils of a divided government.
      After weighing with attention every word of the passage, I am of
      opinion, that it suits better with the elevation of Gordian, than
      with any other period of the Roman history. In that case, it may
      serve to decide the age of Quintus Curtius. Those who place him
      under the first Cæsars, argue from the purity of his style but
      are embarrassed by the silence of Quintilian, in his accurate
      list of Roman historians. * Note: This conjecture of Gibbon is
      without foundation. Many passages in the work of Quintus Curtius
      clearly place him at an earlier period. Thus, in speaking of the
      Parthians, he says, Hinc in Parthicum perventum est, tunc
      ignobilem gentem: nunc caput omnium qui post Euphratem et Tigrim
      amnes siti Rubro mari terminantur. The Parthian empire had this
      extent only in the first age of the vulgar æra: to that age,
      therefore, must be assigned the date of Quintus Curtius. Although
      the critics (says M. de Sainte Croix) have multiplied conjectures
      on this subject, most of them have ended by adopting the opinion
      which places Quintus Curtius under the reign of Claudius. See
      Just. Lips. ad Ann. Tac. ii. 20. Michel le Tellier Præf. in Curt.
      Tillemont Hist. des Emp. i. p. 251. Du Bos Reflections sur la
      Poesie, 2d Partie. Tiraboschi Storia della, Lett. Ital. ii. 149.
      Examen. crit. des Historiens d’Alexandre, 2d ed. p. 104, 849,
      850.—G. ——This interminable question seems as much perplexed as
      ever. The first argument of M. Guizot is a strong one, except
      that Parthian is often used by later writers for Persian.
      Cunzius, in his preface to an edition published at Helmstadt,
      (1802,) maintains the opinion of Bagnolo, which assigns Q.
      Curtius to the time of Constantine the Great. Schmieder, in his
      edit. Gotting. 1803, sums up in this sentence, ætatem Curtii
      ignorari pala mest.—M.]


      As the third Gordian was only nineteen years of age at the time
      of his death, the history of his life, were it known to us with
      greater accuracy than it really is, would contain little more
      than the account of his education, and the conduct of the
      ministers, who by turns abused or guided the simplicity of his
      unexperienced youth. Immediately after his accession, he fell
      into the hands of his mother’s eunuchs, that pernicious vermin of
      the East, who, since the days of Elagabalus, had infested the
      Roman palace. By the artful conspiracy of these wretches, an
      impenetrable veil was drawn between an innocent prince and his
      oppressed subjects, the virtuous disposition of Gordian was
      deceived, and the honors of the empire sold without his
      knowledge, though in a very public manner, to the most worthless
      of mankind. We are ignorant by what fortunate accident the
      emperor escaped from this ignominious slavery, and devolved his
      confidence on a minister, whose wise counsels had no object
      except the glory of his sovereign and the happiness of the
      people. It should seem that love and learning introduced
      Misitheus to the favor of Gordian. The young prince married the
      daughter of his master of rhetoric, and promoted his
      father-in-law to the first offices of the empire. Two admirable
      letters that passed between them are still extant. The minister,
      with the conscious dignity of virtue, congratulates Gordian that
      he is delivered from the tyranny of the eunuchs, 47 and still
      more that he is sensible of his deliverance. The emperor
      acknowledges, with an amiable confusion, the errors of his past
      conduct; and laments, with singular propriety, the misfortune of
      a monarch from whom a venal tribe of courtiers perpetually labor
      to conceal the truth. 48


      47 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 161. From some hints in the two
      letters, I should expect that the eunuchs were not expelled the
      palace without some degree of gentle violence, and that the young
      Gordian rather approved of, than consented to, their disgrace.]


      48 (return) [ Duxit uxorem filiam Misithei, quem causa eloquentiæ
      dignum parentela sua putavit; et præfectum statim fecit; post
      quod, non puerile jam et contemptibile videbatur imperium.]


      The life of Misitheus had been spent in the profession of
      letters, not of arms; yet such was the versatile genius of that
      great man, that, when he was appointed Prætorian Præfect, he
      discharged the military duties of his place with vigor and
      ability. The Persians had invaded Mesopotamia, and threatened
      Antioch. By the persuasion of his father-in-law, the young
      emperor quitted the luxury of Rome, opened, for the last time
      recorded in history, the temple of Janus, and marched in person
      into the East. On his approach, with a great army, the Persians
      withdrew their garrisons from the cities which they had already
      taken, and retired from the Euphrates to the Tigris. Gordian
      enjoyed the pleasure of announcing to the senate the first
      success of his arms, which he ascribed, with a becoming modesty
      and gratitude, to the wisdom of his father and Præfect. During
      the whole expedition, Misitheus watched over the safety and
      discipline of the army; whilst he prevented their dangerous
      murmurs by maintaining a regular plenty in the camp, and by
      establishing ample magazines of vinegar, bacon, straw, barley,
      and wheat in all the cities of the frontier. 49 But the
      prosperity of Gordian expired with Misitheus, who died of a flux,
      not without very strong suspicions of poison. Philip, his
      successor in the præfecture, was an Arab by birth, and
      consequently, in the earlier part of his life, a robber by
      profession. His rise from so obscure a station to the first
      dignities of the empire, seems to prove that he was a bold and
      able leader. But his boldness prompted him to aspire to the
      throne, and his abilities were employed to supplant, not to
      serve, his indulgent master. The minds of the soldiers were
      irritated by an artificial scarcity, created by his contrivance
      in the camp; and the distress of the army was attributed to the
      youth and incapacity of the prince. It is not in our power to
      trace the successive steps of the secret conspiracy and open
      sedition, which were at length fatal to Gordian. A sepulchral
      monument was erected to his memory on the spot 50 where he was
      killed, near the conflux of the Euphrates with the little river
      Aboras. 51 The fortunate Philip, raised to the empire by the
      votes of the soldiers, found a ready obedience from the senate
      and the provinces. 52


      49 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 162. Aurelius Victor. Porphyrius
      in Vit Plotin. ap. Fabricium, Biblioth. Græc. l. iv. c. 36. The
      philosopher Plotinus accompanied the army, prompted by the love
      of knowledge, and by the hope of penetrating as far as India.]


      50 (return) [ About twenty miles from the little town of
      Circesium, on the frontier of the two empires. * Note: Now
      Kerkesia; placed in the angle formed by the juncture of the
      Chaboras, or al Khabour, with the Euphrates. This situation
      appeared advantageous to Diocletian, that he raised
      fortifications to make it the but wark of the empire on the side
      of Mesopotamia. D’Anville. Geog. Anc. ii. 196.—G. It is the
      Carchemish of the Old Testament, 2 Chron. xxxv. 20. ler. xlvi.
      2.—M.]


      51 (return) [ The inscription (which contained a very singular
      pun) was erased by the order of Licinius, who claimed some degree
      of relationship to Philip, (Hist. August. p. 166;) but the
      tumulus, or mound of earth which formed the sepulchre, still
      subsisted in the time of Julian. See Ammian Marcellin. xxiii. 5.]


      52 (return) [ Aurelius Victor. Eutrop. ix. 2. Orosius, vii. 20.
      Ammianus Marcellinus, xxiii. 5. Zosimus, l. i. p. 19. Philip, who
      was a native of Bostra, was about forty years of age. * Note: Now
      Bosra. It was once the metropolis of a province named Arabia, and
      the chief city of Auranitis, of which the name is preserved in
      Beled Hauran, the limits of which meet the desert. D’Anville.
      Geog. Anc. ii. 188. According to Victor, (in Cæsar.,) Philip was
      a native of Tracbonitis another province of Arabia.—G.]


      We cannot forbear transcribing the ingenious, though somewhat
      fanciful description, which a celebrated writer of our own times
      has traced of the military government of the Roman empire. What
      in that age was called the Roman empire, was only an irregular
      republic, not unlike the aristocracy 53 of Algiers, 54 where the
      militia, possessed of the sovereignty, creates and deposes a
      magistrate, who is styled a Dey. Perhaps, indeed, it may be laid
      down as a general rule, that a military government is, in some
      respects, more republican than monarchical. Nor can it be said
      that the soldiers only partook of the government by their
      disobedience and rebellions. The speeches made to them by the
      emperors, were they not at length of the same nature as those
      formerly pronounced to the people by the consuls and the
      tribunes? And although the armies had no regular place or forms
      of assembly; though their debates were short, their action
      sudden, and their resolves seldom the result of cool reflection,
      did they not dispose, with absolute sway, of the public fortune?
      What was the emperor, except the minister of a violent
      government, elected for the private benefit of the soldiers?


      53 (return) [ Can the epithet of Aristocracy be applied, with any
      propriety, to the government of Algiers? Every military
      government floats between two extremes of absolute monarchy and
      wild democracy.]


      54 (return) [ The military republic of the Mamelukes in Egypt
      would have afforded M. de Montesquieu (see Considerations sur la
      Grandeur et la Decadence des Romains, c. 16) a juster and more
      noble parallel.]


      “When the army had elected Philip, who was Prætorian præfect to
      the third Gordian, the latter demanded that he might remain sole
      emperor; he was unable to obtain it. He requested that the power
      might be equally divided between them; the army would not listen
      to his speech. He consented to be degraded to the rank of Cæsar;
      the favor was refused him. He desired, at least, he might be
      appointed Prætorian præfect; his prayer was rejected. Finally, he
      pleaded for his life. The army, in these several judgments,
      exercised the supreme magistracy.” According to the historian,
      whose doubtful narrative the President De Montesquieu has
      adopted, Philip, who, during the whole transaction, had preserved
      a sullen silence, was inclined to spare the innocent life of his
      benefactor; till, recollecting that his innocence might excite a
      dangerous compassion in the Roman world, he commanded, without
      regard to his suppliant cries, that he should be seized,
      stripped, and led away to instant death. After a moment’s pause,
      the inhuman sentence was executed. 55


      55 (return) [ The Augustan History (p. 163, 164) cannot, in this
      instance, be reconciled with itself or with probability. How
      could Philip condemn his predecessor, and yet consecrate his
      memory? How could he order his public execution, and yet, in his
      letters to the senate, exculpate himself from the guilt of his
      death? Philip, though an ambitious usurper, was by no means a mad
      tyrant. Some chronological difficulties have likewise been
      discovered by the nice eyes of Tillemont and Muratori, in this
      supposed association of Philip to the empire. * Note: Wenck
      endeavors to reconcile these discrepancies. He supposes that
      Gordian was led away, and died a natural death in prison. This is
      directly contrary to the statement of Capitolinus and of Zosimus,
      whom he adduces in support of his theory. He is more successful
      in his precedents of usurpers deifying the victims of their
      ambition. Sit divus, dummodo non sit vivus.—M.]


      Chapter VII: Tyranny Of Maximin, Rebellion, Civil Wars, Death Of
      Maximin.—Part III.


      On his return from the East to Rome, Philip, desirous of
      obliterating the memory of his crimes, and of captivating the
      affections of the people, solemnized the secular games with
      infinite pomp and magnificence. Since their institution or
      revival by Augustus, 56 they had been celebrated by Claudius, by
      Domitian, and by Severus, and were now renewed the fifth time, on
      the accomplishment of the full period of a thousand years from
      the foundation of Rome. Every circumstance of the secular games
      was skillfully adapted to inspire the superstitious mind with
      deep and solemn reverence. The long interval between them 57
      exceeded the term of human life; and as none of the spectators
      had already seen them, none could flatter themselves with the
      expectation of beholding them a second time. The mystic
      sacrifices were performed, during three nights, on the banks of
      the Tyber; and the Campus Martius resounded with music and
      dances, and was illuminated with innumerable lamps and torches.
      Slaves and strangers were excluded from any participation in
      these national ceremonies. A chorus of twenty-seven youths, and
      as many virgins, of noble families, and whose parents were both
      alive, implored the propitious gods in favor of the present, and
      for the hope of the rising generation; requesting, in religious
      hymns, that according to the faith of their ancient oracles, they
      would still maintain the virtue, the felicity, and the empire of
      the Roman people. The magnificence of Philip’s shows and
      entertainments dazzled the eyes of the multitude. The devout were
      employed in the rites of superstition, whilst the reflecting few
      revolved in their anxious minds the past history and the future
      fate of the empire.58


      56 (return) [ The account of the last supposed celebration,
      though in an enlightened period of history, was so very doubtful
      and obscure, that the alternative seems not doubtful. When the
      popish jubilees, the copy of the secular games, were invented by
      Boniface VII., the crafty pope pretended that he only revived an
      ancient institution. See M. le Chais, Lettres sur les Jubiles.]


      57 (return) [ Either of a hundred or a hundred and ten years.
      Varro and Livy adopted the former opinion, but the infallible
      authority of the Sybil consecrated the latter, (Censorinus de Die
      Natal. c. 17.) The emperors Claudius and Philip, however, did not
      treat the oracle with implicit respect.]


      58 (return) [ The idea of the secular games is best understood
      from the poem of Horace, and the description of Zosimus, 1. l.
      ii. p. 167, &c.] Since Romulus, with a small band of shepherds
      and outlaws, fortified himself on the hills near the Tyber, ten
      centuries had already elapsed. 59 During the four first ages, the
      Romans, in the laborious school of poverty, had acquired the
      virtues of war and government: by the vigorous exertion of those
      virtues, and by the assistance of fortune, they had obtained, in
      the course of the three succeeding centuries, an absolute empire
      over many countries of Europe, Asia, and Africa. The last three
      hundred years had been consumed in apparent prosperity and
      internal decline. The nation of soldiers, magistrates, and
      legislators, who composed the thirty-five tribes of the Roman
      people, were dissolved into the common mass of mankind, and
      confounded with the millions of servile provincials, who had
      received the name, without adopting the spirit, of Romans. A
      mercenary army, levied among the subjects and barbarians of the
      frontier, was the only order of men who preserved and abused
      their independence. By their tumultuary election, a Syrian, a
      Goth, or an Arab, was exalted to the throne of Rome, and invested
      with despotic power over the conquests and over the country of
      the Scipios.


      59 (return) [The received calculation of Varro assigns to the
      foundation of Rome an æra that corresponds with the 754th year
      before Christ. But so little is the chronology of Rome to be
      depended on, in the more early ages, that Sir Isaac Newton has
      brought the same event as low as the year 627 (Compare Niebuhr
      vol. i. p. 271.—M.)]


      The limits of the Roman empire still extended from the Western
      Ocean to the Tigris, and from Mount Atlas to the Rhine and the
      Danube. To the undiscerning eye of the vulgar, Philip appeared a
      monarch no less powerful than Hadrian or Augustus had formerly
      been. The form was still the same, but the animating health and
      vigor were fled. The industry of the people was discouraged and
      exhausted by a long series of oppression. The discipline of the
      legions, which alone, after the extinction of every other virtue,
      had propped the greatness of the state, was corrupted by the
      ambition, or relaxed by the weakness, of the emperors. The
      strength of the frontiers, which had always consisted in arms
      rather than in fortifications, was insensibly undermined; and the
      fairest provinces were left exposed to the rapaciousness or
      ambition of the barbarians, who soon discovered the decline of
      the Roman empire.


      Chapter VIII: State Of Persia And Restoration Of The
      Monarchy.—Part I.


Of The State Of Persia After The Restoration Of The Monarchy By
Artaxerxes.


      Whenever Tacitus indulges himself in those beautiful episodes, in
      which he relates some domestic transaction of the Germans or of
      the Parthians, his principal object is to relieve the attention
      of the reader from a uniform scene of vice and misery. From the
      reign of Augustus to the time of Alexander Severus, the enemies
      of Rome were in her bosom—the tyrants and the soldiers; and her
      prosperity had a very distant and feeble interest in the
      revolutions that might happen beyond the Rhine and the Euphrates.
      But when the military order had levelled, in wild anarchy, the
      power of the prince, the laws of the senate, and even the
      discipline of the camp, the barbarians of the North and of the
      East, who had long hovered on the frontier, boldly attacked the
      provinces of a declining monarchy. Their vexatious inroads were
      changed into formidable irruptions, and, after a long vicissitude
      of mutual calamities, many tribes of the victorious invaders
      established themselves in the provinces of the Roman Empire. To
      obtain a clearer knowledge of these great events, we shall
      endeavor to form a previous idea of the character, forces, and
      designs of those nations who avenged the cause of Hannibal and
      Mithridates.


      In the more early ages of the world, whilst the forest that
      covered Europe afforded a retreat to a few wandering savages, the
      inhabitants of Asia were already collected into populous cities,
      and reduced under extensive empires the seat of the arts, of
      luxury, and of despotism. The Assyrians reigned over the East, 1
      till the sceptre of Ninus and Semiramis dropped from the hands of
      their enervated successors. The Medes and the Babylonians divided
      their power, and were themselves swallowed up in the monarchy of
      the Persians, whose arms could not be confined within the narrow
      limits of Asia. Followed, as it is said, by two millions of
      _men_, Xerxes, the descendant of Cyrus, invaded Greece.


      Thirty thousand _soldiers_, under the command of Alexander, the
      son of Philip, who was intrusted by the Greeks with their glory
      and revenge, were sufficient to subdue Persia. The princes of the
      house of Seleucus usurped and lost the Macedonian command over
      the East. About the same time, that, by an ignominious treaty,
      they resigned to the Romans the country on this side Mount Tarus,
      they were driven by the Parthians, 1001 an obscure horde of
      Scythian origin, from all the provinces of Upper Asia. The
      formidable power of the Parthians, which spread from India to the
      frontiers of Syria, was in its turn subverted by Ardshir, or
      Artaxerxes; the founder of a new dynasty, which, under the name
      of Sassanides, governed Persia till the invasion of the Arabs.
      This great revolution, whose fatal influence was soon experienced
      by the Romans, happened in the fourth year of Alexander Severus,
      two hundred and twenty-six years after the Christian era. 2 201


      1 (return) [ An ancient chronologist, quoted by Valleius
      Paterculus, (l. i. c. 6,) observes, that the Assyrians, the
      Medes, the Persians, and the Macedonians, reigned over Asia one
      thousand nine hundred and ninety-five years, from the accession
      of Ninus to the defeat of Antiochus by the Romans. As the latter
      of these great events happened 289 years before Christ, the
      former may be placed 2184 years before the same æra. The
      Astronomical Observations, found at Babylon, by Alexander, went
      fifty years higher.]


      1001 (return) [ The Parthians were a tribe of the Indo-Germanic
      branch which dwelt on the south-east of the Caspian, and belonged
      to the same race as the Getæ, the Massagetæ, and other nations,
      confounded by the ancients under the vague denomination of
      Scythians. Klaproth, Tableaux Hist. d l’Asie, p. 40. Strabo (p.
      747) calls the Parthians Carduchi, i.e., the inhabitants of
      Curdistan.—M.]


      2 (return) [ In the five hundred and thirty-eighth year of the
      æra of Seleucus. See Agathias, l. ii. p. 63. This great event
      (such is the carelessness of the Orientals) is placed by
      Eutychius as high as the tenth year of Commodus, and by Moses of
      Chorene as low as the reign of Philip. Ammianus Marcellinus has
      so servilely copied (xxiii. 6) his ancient materials, which are
      indeed very good, that he describes the family of the Arsacides
      as still seated on the Persian throne in the middle of the fourth
      century.]


      201 (return) [ The Persian History, if the poetry of the Shah
      Nameh, the Book of Kings, may deserve that name mentions four
      dynasties from the earliest ages to the invasion of the Saracens.
      The Shah Nameh was composed with the view of perpetuating the
      remains of the original Persian records or traditions which had
      survived the Saracenic invasion. The task was undertaken by the
      poet Dukiki, and afterwards, under the patronage of Mahmood of
      Ghazni, completed by Ferdusi. The first of these dynasties is
      that of Kaiomors, as Sir W. Jones observes, the dark and fabulous
      period; the second, that of the Kaianian, the heroic and
      poetical, in which the earned have discovered some curious, and
      imagined some fanciful, analogies with the Jewish, the Greek, and
      the Roman accounts of the eastern world. See, on the Shah Nameh,
      Translation by Goerres, with Von Hammer’s Review, Vienna Jahrbuch
      von Lit. 17, 75, 77. Malcolm’s Persia, 8vo. ed. i. 503. Macan’s
      Preface to his Critical Edition of the Shah Nameh. On the early
      Persian History, a very sensible abstract of various opinions in
      Malcolm’s Hist. of Persian.—M.]


      Artaxerxes had served with great reputation in the armies of
      Artaban, the last king of the Parthians, and it appears that he
      was driven into exile and rebellion by royal ingratitude, the
      customary reward for superior merit. His birth was obscure, and
      the obscurity equally gave room to the aspersions of his enemies,
      and the flattery of his adherents. If we credit the scandal of
      the former, Artaxerxes sprang from the illegitimate commerce of a
      tanner’s wife with a common soldier. 3 The latter represent him
      as descended from a branch of the ancient kings of Persian,
      though time and misfortune had gradually reduced his ancestors to
      the humble station of private citizens. 4 As the lineal heir of
      the monarchy, he asserted his right to the throne, and challenged
      the noble task of delivering the Persians from the oppression
      under which they groaned above five centuries since the death of
      Darius. The Parthians were defeated in three great battles. 401
      In the last of these their king Artaban was slain, and the spirit
      of the nation was forever broken. 5 The authority of Artaxerxes
      was solemnly acknowledged in a great assembly held at Balch in
      Khorasan. 501 Two younger branches of the royal house of Arsaces
      were confounded among the prostrate satraps. A third, more
      mindful of ancient grandeur than of present necessity, attempted
      to retire, with a numerous train of vessels, towards their
      kinsman, the king of Armenia; but this little army of deserters
      was intercepted, and cut off, by the vigilance of the conqueror,
      6 who boldly assumed the double diadem, and the title of King of
      Kings, which had been enjoyed by his predecessor. But these
      pompous titles, instead of gratifying the vanity of the Persian,
      served only to admonish him of his duty, and to inflame in his
      soul the ambition of restoring in their full splendor, the
      religion and empire of Cyrus.


      3 (return) [ The tanner’s name was Babec; the soldier’s, Sassan:
      from the former Artaxerxes obtained the surname of Babegan, from
      the latter all his descendants have been styled Sassanides.]


      4 (return) [ D’Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, Ardshir.]


      401 (return) [ In the plain of Hoormuz, the son of Babek was
      hailed in the field with the proud title of Shahan Shah, king of
      kings—a name ever since assumed by the sovereigns of Persia.
      Malcolm, i. 71.—M.]


      5 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxxx. Herodian, l. vi. p. 207.
      Abulpharagins Dynast. p. 80.]


      501 (return) [ See the Persian account of the rise of Ardeschir
      Babegan in Malcolm l 69.—M.]


      6 (return) [ See Moses Chorenensis, l. ii. c. 65—71.]


      I. During the long servitude of Persia under the Macedonian and
      the Parthian yoke, the nations of Europe and Asia had mutually
      adopted and corrupted each other’s superstitions. The Arsacides,
      indeed, practised the worship of the Magi; but they disgraced and
      polluted it with a various mixture of foreign idolatry. 601 The
      memory of Zoroaster, the ancient prophet and philosopher of the
      Persians, 7 was still revered in the East; but the obsolete and
      mysterious language, in which the Zendavesta was composed, 8
      opened a field of dispute to seventy sects, who variously
      explained the fundamental doctrines of their religion, and were
      all indifferently devided by a crowd of infidels, who rejected
      the divine mission and miracles of the prophet. To suppress the
      idolaters, reunite the schismatics, and confute the unbelievers,
      by the infallible decision of a general council, the pious
      Artaxerxes summoned the Magi from all parts of his dominions.
      These priests, who had so long sighed in contempt and obscurity
      obeyed the welcome summons; and, on the appointed day, appeared,
      to the number of about eighty thousand. But as the debates of so
      tumultuous an assembly could not have been directed by the
      authority of reason, or influenced by the art of policy, the
      Persian synod was reduced, by successive operations, to forty
      thousand, to four thousand, to four hundred, to forty, and at
      last to seven Magi, the most respected for their learning and
      piety. One of these, Erdaviraph, a young but holy prelate,
      received from the hands of his brethren three cups of
      soporiferous wine. He drank them off, and instantly fell into a
      long and profound sleep. As soon as he waked, he related to the
      king and to the believing multitude, his journey to heaven, and
      his intimate conferences with the Deity. Every doubt was silenced
      by this supernatural evidence; and the articles of the faith of
      Zoroaster were fixed with equal authority and precision. 9 A
      short delineation of that celebrated system will be found useful,
      not only to display the character of the Persian nation, but to
      illustrate many of their most important transactions, both in
      peace and war, with the Roman empire. 10


      601 (return) [ Silvestre de Sacy (Antiquites de la Perse) had
      proved the neglect of the Zoroastrian religion under the Parthian
      kings.—M.]


      7 (return) [ Hyde and Prideaux, working up the Persian legends
      and their own conjectures into a very agreeable story, represent
      Zoroaster as a contemporary of Darius Hystaspes. But it is
      sufficient to observe, that the Greek writers, who lived almost
      in the age of Darius, agree in placing the æra of Zoroaster many
      hundred, or even thousand, years before their own time. The
      judicious criticisms of Mr. Moyle perceived, and maintained
      against his uncle, Dr. Prideaux, the antiquity of the Persian
      prophet. See his work, vol. ii. * Note: There are three leading
      theories concerning the age of Zoroaster: 1. That which assigns
      him to an age of great and almost indefinite antiquity—it is that
      of Moyle, adopted by Gibbon, Volney, Recherches sur l’Histoire,
      ii. 2. Rhode, also, (die Heilige Sage, &c.,) in a very ingenious
      and ably-developed theory, throws the Bactrian prophet far back
      into antiquity 2. Foucher, (Mem. de l’Acad. xxvii. 253,) Tychsen,
      (in Com. Soc. Gott. ii. 112), Heeren, (ldeen. i. 459,) and
      recently Holty, identify the Gushtasp of the Persian mythological
      history with Cyaxares the First, the king of the Medes, and
      consider the religion to be Median in its origin. M. Guizot
      considers this opinion most probable, note in loc. 3. Hyde,
      Prideaux, Anquetil du Perron, Kleuker, Herder, Goerres,
      (Mythen-Geschichte,) Von Hammer. (Wien. Jahrbuch, vol. ix.,)
      Malcolm, (i. 528,) De Guigniaut, (Relig. de l’Antiq. 2d part,
      vol. iii.,) Klaproth, (Tableaux de l’Asie, p. 21,) make Gushtasp
      Darius Hystaspes, and Zoroaster his contemporary. The silence of
      Herodotus appears the great objection to this theory. Some
      writers, as M. Foucher (resting, as M. Guizot observes, on the
      doubtful authority of Pliny,) make more than one Zoroaster, and
      so attempt to reconcile the conflicting theories.— M.]


      8 (return) [ That ancient idiom was called the Zend. The language
      of the commentary, the Pehlvi, though much more modern, has
      ceased many ages ago to be a living tongue. This fact alone (if
      it is allowed as authentic) sufficiently warrants the antiquity
      of those writings which M d’Anquetil has brought into Europe, and
      translated into French. * Note: Zend signifies life, living. The
      word means, either the collection of the canonical books of the
      followers of Zoroaster, or the language itself in which they are
      written. They are the books that contain the word of life whether
      the language was originally called Zend, or whether it was so
      called from the contents of the books. Avesta means word, oracle,
      revelation: this term is not the title of a particular work, but
      of the collection of the books of Zoroaster, as the revelation of
      Ormuzd. This collection is sometimes called Zendavesta, sometimes
      briefly Zend. The Zend was the ancient language of Media, as is
      proved by its affinity with the dialects of Armenia and Georgia;
      it was already a dead language under the Arsacides in the country
      which was the scene of the events recorded in the Zendavesta.
      Some critics, among others Richardson and Sir W. Jones, have
      called in question the antiquity of these books. The former
      pretended that Zend had never been a written or spoken language,
      but had been invented in the later times by the Magi, for the
      purposes of their art; but Kleuker, in the dissertations which he
      added to those of Anquetil and the Abbé Foucher, has proved that
      the Zend was a living and spoken language.—G. Sir W. Jones
      appears to have abandoned his doubts, on discovering the affinity
      between the Zend and the Sanskrit. Since the time of Kleuker,
      this question has been investigated by many learned scholars. Sir
      W. Jones, Leyden, (Asiat. Research. x. 283,) and Mr. Erskine,
      (Bombay Trans. ii. 299,) consider it a derivative from the
      Sanskrit. The antiquity of the Zendavesta has likewise been
      asserted by Rask, the great Danish linguist, who, according to
      Malcolm, brought back from the East fresh transcripts and
      additions to those published by Anquetil. According to Rask, the
      Zend and Sanskrit are sister dialects; the one the parent of the
      Persian, the other of the Indian family of languages.—G. and
      M.——But the subject is more satisfactorily illustrated in Bopp’s
      comparative Grammar of the Sanscrit, Zend, Greek, Latin,
      Lithuanian, Gothic, and German languages. Berlin. 1833-5.
      According to Bopp, the Zend is, in some respects, of a more
      remarkable structure than the Sanskrit. Parts of the Zendavesta
      have been published in the original, by M. Bournouf, at Paris,
      and M. Ol. shausen, in Hamburg.—M.——The Pehlvi was the language
      of the countries bordering on Assyria, and probably of Assyria
      itself. Pehlvi signifies valor, heroism; the Pehlvi, therefore,
      was the language of the ancient heroes and kings of Persia, the
      valiant. (Mr. Erskine prefers the derivation from Pehla, a
      border.—M.) It contains a number of Aramaic roots. Anquetil
      considered it formed from the Zend. Kleuker does not adopt this
      opinion. The Pehlvi, he says, is much more flowing, and less
      overcharged with vowels, than the Zend. The books of Zoroaster,
      first written in Zend, were afterwards translated into Pehlvi and
      Parsi. The Pehlvi had fallen into disuse under the dynasty of the
      Sassanides, but the learned still wrote it. The Parsi, the
      dialect of Pars or Farristan, was then prevailing dialect.
      Kleuker, Anhang zum Zend Avesta, 2, ii. part i. p. 158, part ii.
      31.—G.——Mr. Erskine (Bombay Transactions) considers the existing
      Zendavesta to have been compiled in the time of Ardeschir
      Babegan.—M.]


      9 (return) [ Hyde de Religione veterum Pers. c. 21.]


      10 (return) [ I have principally drawn this account from the
      Zendavesta of M. d’Anquetil, and the Sadder, subjoined to Dr.
      Hyde’s treatise. It must, however, be confessed, that the studied
      obscurity of a prophet, the figurative style of the East, and the
      deceitful medium of a French or Latin version may have betrayed
      us into error and heresy, in this abridgment of Persian theology.
      * Note: It is to be regretted that Gibbon followed the
      post-Mahometan Sadder of Hyde.—M.]


      The great and fundamental article of the system was the
      celebrated doctrine of the two principles; a bold and injudicious
      attempt of Eastern philosophy to reconcile the existence of moral
      and physical evil with the attributes of a beneficent Creator and
      Governor of the world. The first and original Being, in whom, or
      by whom, the universe exists, is denominated in the writings of
      Zoroaster, _Time without bounds_; 1001a but it must be confessed,
      that this infinite substance seems rather a metaphysical
      abstraction of the mind than a real object endowed with
      self-consciousness, or possessed of moral perfections. From
      either the blind or the intelligent operation of this infinite
      Time, which bears but too near an affinity with the chaos of the
      Greeks, the two secondary but active principles of the universe
      were from all eternity produced, Ormusd and Ahriman, each of them
      possessed of the powers of creation, but each disposed, by his
      invariable nature, to exercise them with different designs. 1002
      The principle of good is eternally aborbed in light; the
      principle of evil eternally buried in darkness. The wise
      benevolence of Ormusd formed man capable of virtue, and
      abundantly provided his fair habitation with the materials of
      happiness. By his vigilant providence, the motion of the planets,
      the order of the seasons, and the temperate mixture of the
      elements, are preserved. But the malice of Ahriman has long since
      pierced _Ormusd’s egg;_ or, in other words, has violated the
      harmony of his works. Since that fatal eruption, the most minute
      articles of good and evil are intimately intermingled and
      agitated together; the rankest poisons spring up amidst the most
      salutary plants; deluges, earthquakes, and conflagrations attest
      the conflict of Nature, and the little world of man is
      perpetually shaken by vice and misfortune. Whilst the rest of
      human kind are led away captives in the chains of their infernal
      enemy, the faithful Persian alone reserves his religious
      adoration for his friend and protector Ormusd, and fights under
      his banner of light, in the full confidence that he shall, in the
      last day, share the glory of his triumph. At that decisive
      period, the enlightened wisdom of goodness will render the power
      of Ormusd superior to the furious malice of his rival. Ahriman
      and his followers, disarmed and subdued, will sink into their
      native darkness; and virtue will maintain the eternal peace and
      harmony of the universe. 11 1101


      1001a (return) [ Zeruane Akerene, so translated by Anquetil and
      Kleuker. There is a dissertation of Foucher on this subject, Mem.
      de l’Acad. des Inscr. t. xxix. According to Bohlen (das alte
      Indien) it is the Sanskrit Sarvan Akaranam, the Uncreated Whole;
      or, according to Fred. Schlegel, Sarvan Akharyam the Uncreate
      Indivisible.—M.]


      1002 (return) [ This is an error. Ahriman was not forced by his
      invariable nature to do evil; the Zendavesta expressly recognizes
      (see the Izeschne) that he was born good, that in his origin he
      was light; envy rendered him evil; he became jealous of the power
      and attributes of Ormuzd; then light was changed into darkness,
      and Ahriman was precipitated into the abyss. See the Abridgment
      of the Doctrine of the Ancient Persians, by Anquetil, c. ii
      Section 2.—G.]


      11 (return) [ The modern Parsees (and in some degree the Sadder)
      exalt Ormusd into the first and omnipotent cause, whilst they
      degrade Ahriman into an inferior but rebellious spirit. Their
      desire of pleasing the Mahometans may have contributed to refine
      their theological systems.]


      1101 (return) [ According to the Zendavesta, Ahriman will not be
      annihilated or precipitated forever into darkness: at the
      resurrection of the dead he will be entirely defeated by Ormuzd,
      his power will be destroyed, his kingdom overthrown to its
      foundations, he will himself be purified in torrents of melting
      metal; he will change his heart and his will, become holy,
      heavenly establish in his dominions the law and word of Ormuzd,
      unite himself with him in everlasting friendship, and both will
      sing hymns in honor of the Great Eternal. See Anquetil’s
      Abridgment. Kleuker, Anhang part iii. p 85, 36; and the Izeschne,
      one of the books of the Zendavesta. According to the Sadder
      Bun-Dehesch, a more modern work, Ahriman is to be annihilated:
      but this is contrary to the text itself of the Zendavesta, and to
      the idea its author gives of the kingdom of Eternity, after the
      twelve thousand years assigned to the contest between Good and
      Evil.—G.]


      Chapter VIII: State Of Persia And Restoration Of The
      Monarchy.—Part II.


      The theology of Zoroaster was darkly comprehended by foreigners,
      and even by the far greater number of his disciples; but the most
      careless observers were struck with the philosophic simplicity of
      the Persian worship. “That people,” said Herodotus, 12 “rejects
      the use of temples, of altars, and of statues, and smiles at the
      folly of those nations who imagine that the gods are sprung from,
      or bear any affinity with, the human nature. The tops of the
      highest mountains are the places chosen for sacrifices. Hymns and
      prayers are the principal worship; the Supreme God, who fills the
      wide circle of heaven, is the object to whom they are addressed.”
      Yet, at the same time, in the true spirit of a polytheist, he
      accuseth them of adoring Earth, Water, Fire, the Winds, and the
      Sun and Moon. But the Persians of every age have denied the
      charge, and explained the equivocal conduct, which might appear
      to give a color to it. The elements, and more particularly Fire,
      Light, and the Sun, whom they called Mithra, 1201 were the
      objects of their religious reverence because they considered them
      as the purest symbols, the noblest productions, and the most
      powerful agents of the Divine Power and Nature. 13


      12 (return) [ Herodotus, l. i. c. 131. But Dr. Prideaux thinks,
      with reason, that the use of temples was afterwards permitted in
      the Magian religion. Note: The Pyræa, or fire temples of the
      Zoroastrians, (observes Kleuker, Persica, p. 16,) were only to be
      found in Media or Aderbidjan, provinces into which Herodotus did
      not penetrate.—M.]


      1201 (return) [ Among the Persians Mithra is not the Sun:
      Anquetil has contested and triumphantly refuted the opinion of
      those who confound them, and it is evidently contrary to the text
      of the Zendavesta. Mithra is the first of the genii, or jzeds,
      created by Ormuzd; it is he who watches over all nature. Hence
      arose the misapprehension of some of the Greeks, who have said
      that Mithra was the summus deus of the Persians: he has a
      thousand ears and ten thousand eyes. The Chaldeans appear to have
      assigned him a higher rank than the Persians. It is he who
      bestows upon the earth the light of the sun. The sun. named Khor,
      (brightness,) is thus an inferior genius, who, with many other
      genii, bears a part in the functions of Mithra. These assistant
      genii to another genius are called his kamkars; but in the
      Zendavesta they are never confounded. On the days sacred to a
      particular genius, the Persian ought to recite, not only the
      prayers addressed to him, but those also which are addressed to
      his kamkars; thus the hymn or iescht of Mithra is recited on the
      day of the sun, (Khor,) and vice versa. It is probably this which
      has sometimes caused them to be confounded; but Anquetil had
      himself exposed this error, which Kleuker, and all who have
      studied the Zendavesta, have noticed. See viii. Diss. of
      Anquetil. Kleuker’s Anhang, part iii. p. 132.—G. M. Guizot is
      unquestionably right, according to the pure and original doctrine
      of the Zend. The Mithriac worship, which was so extensively
      propagated in the West, and in which Mithra and the sun were
      perpetually confounded, seems to have been formed from a fusion
      of Zoroastrianism and Chaldaism, or the Syrian worship of the
      sun. An excellent abstract of the question, with references to
      the works of the chief modern writers on his curious subject, De
      Sacy, Kleuker, Von Hammer, &c., may be found in De Guigniaut’s
      translation of Kreuzer. Relig. d’Antiquite, notes viii. ix. to
      book ii. vol. i. 2d part, page 728.—M.]


      13 (return) [ Hyde de Relig. Pers. c. 8. Notwithstanding all
      their distinctions and protestations, which seem sincere enough,
      their tyrants, the Mahometans, have constantly stigmatized them
      as idolatrous worshippers of the fire.]


      Every mode of religion, to make a deep and lasting impression on
      the human mind, must exercise our obedience, by enjoining
      practices of devotion, for which we can assign no reason; and
      must acquire our esteem, by inculcating moral duties analogous to
      the dictates of our own hearts. The religion of Zoroaster was
      abundantly provided with the former and possessed a sufficient
      portion of the latter. At the age of puberty, the faithful
      Persian was invested with a mysterious girdle, the badge of the
      divine protection; and from that moment all the actions of his
      life, even the most indifferent, or the most necessary, were
      sanctified by their peculiar prayers, ejaculations, or
      genuflections; the omission of which, under any circumstances,
      was a grievous sin, not inferior in guilt to the violation of the
      moral duties. The moral duties, however, of justice, mercy,
      liberality, &c., were in their turn required of the disciple of
      Zoroaster, who wished to escape the persecution of Ahriman, and
      to live with Ormusd in a blissful eternity, where the degree of
      felicity will be exactly proportioned to the degree of virtue and
      piety. 14


      14 (return) [ See the Sadder, the smallest part of which consists
      of moral precepts. The ceremonies enjoined are infinite and
      trifling. Fifteen genuflections, prayers, &c., were required
      whenever the devout Persian cut his nails or made water; or as
      often as he put on the sacred girdle Sadder, Art. 14, 50, 60. *
      Note: Zoroaster exacted much less ceremonial observance, than at
      a later period, the priests of his doctrines. This is the
      progress of all religions the worship, simple in its origin, is
      gradually overloaded with minute superstitions. The maxim of the
      Zendavesta, on the relative merit of sowing the earth and of
      prayers, quoted below by Gibbon, proves that Zoroaster did not
      attach too much importance to these observances. Thus it is not
      from the Zendavesta that Gibbon derives the proof of his
      allegation, but from the Sadder, a much later work.—G]


      But there are some remarkable instances in which Zoroaster lays
      aside the prophet, assumes the legislator, and discovers a
      liberal concern for private and public happiness, seldom to be
      found among the grovelling or visionary schemes of superstition.
      Fasting and celibacy, the common means of purchasing the divine
      favor, he condemns with abhorrence as a criminal rejection of the
      best gifts of Providence. The saint, in the Magian religion, is
      obliged to beget children, to plant useful trees, to destroy
      noxious animals, to convey water to the dry lands of Persia, and
      to work out his salvation by pursuing all the labors of
      agriculture. 1401 We may quote from the Zendavesta a wise and
      benevolent maxim, which compensates for many an absurdity. “He
      who sows the ground with care and diligence acquires a greater
      stock of religious merit than he could gain by the repetition of
      ten thousand prayers.” 15 In the spring of every year a festival
      was celebrated, destined to represent the primitive equality, and
      the present connection, of mankind. The stately kings of Persia,
      exchanging their vain pomp for more genuine greatness, freely
      mingled with the humblest but most useful of their subjects. On
      that day the husbandmen were admitted, without distinction, to
      the table of the king and his satraps. The monarch accepted their
      petitions, inquired into their grievances, and conversed with
      them on the most equal terms. “From your labors,” was he
      accustomed to say, (and to say with truth, if not with
      sincerity,) “from your labors we receive our subsistence; you
      derive your tranquillity from our vigilance: since, therefore, we
      are mutually necessary to each other, let us live together like
      brothers in concord and love.” 16 Such a festival must indeed
      have degenerated, in a wealthy and despotic empire, into a
      theatrical representation; but it was at least a comedy well
      worthy of a royal audience, and which might sometimes imprint a
      salutary lesson on the mind of a young prince.


      1401 (return) [ See, on Zoroaster’s encouragement of agriculture,
      the ingenious remarks of Heeren, Ideen, vol. i. p. 449, &c., and
      Rhode, Heilige Sage, p. 517—M.]


      15 (return) [ Zendavesta, tom. i. p. 224, and Precis du Systeme
      de Zoroastre, tom. iii.]


      16 (return) [ Hyde de Religione Persarum, c. 19.]


      Had Zoroaster, in all his institutions, invariably supported this
      exalted character, his name would deserve a place with those of
      Numa and Confucius, and his system would be justly entitled to
      all the applause, which it has pleased some of our divines, and
      even some of our philosophers, to bestow on it. But in that
      motley composition, dictated by reason and passion, by enthusiasm
      and by selfish motives, some useful and sublime truths were
      disgraced by a mixture of the most abject and dangerous
      superstition. The Magi, or sacerdotal order, were extremely
      numerous, since, as we have already seen, fourscore thousand of
      them were convened in a general council. Their forces were
      multiplied by discipline. A regular hierarchy was diffused
      through all the provinces of Persia; and the Archimagus, who
      resided at Balch, was respected as the visible head of the
      church, and the lawful successor of Zoroaster. 17 The property of
      the Magi was very considerable. Besides the less invidious
      possession of a large tract of the most fertile lands of Media,
      18 they levied a general tax on the fortunes and the industry of
      the Persians. 19 “Though your good works,” says the interested
      prophet, “exceed in number the leaves of the trees, the drops of
      rain, the stars in the heaven, or the sands on the sea-shore,
      they will all be unprofitable to you, unless they are accepted by
      the _destour_, or priest. To obtain the acceptation of this guide
      to salvation, you must faithfully pay him _tithes_ of all you
      possess, of your goods, of your lands, and of your money. If the
      destour be satisfied, your soul will escape hell tortures; you
      will secure praise in this world and happiness in the next. For
      the destours are the teachers of religion; they know all things,
      and they deliver all men.” 20 201a


      17 (return) [ Hyde de Religione Persarum, c. 28. Both Hyde and
      Prideaux affect to apply to the Magian the terms consecrated to
      the Christian hierarchy.]


      18 (return) [ Ammian. Marcellin. xxiii. 6. He informs us (as far
      as we may credit him) of two curious particulars: 1. That the
      Magi derived some of their most secret doctrines from the Indian
      Brachmans; and 2. That they were a tribe, or family, as well as
      order.]


      19 (return) [ The divine institution of tithes exhibits a
      singular instance of conformity between the law of Zoroaster and
      that of Moses. Those who cannot otherwise account for it, may
      suppose, if they please that the Magi of the latter times
      inserted so useful an interpolation into the writings of their
      prophet.]


      20 (return) [ Sadder, Art. viii.]


      201a (return) [ The passage quoted by Gibbon is not taken from
      the writings of Zoroaster, but from the Sadder, a work, as has
      been before said, much later than the books which form the
      Zendavesta. and written by a Magus for popular use; what it
      contains, therefore, cannot be attributed to Zoroaster. It is
      remarkable that Gibbon should fall into this error, for Hyde
      himself does not ascribe the Sadder to Zoroaster; he remarks that
      it is written inverse, while Zoroaster always wrote in prose.
      Hyde, i. p. 27. Whatever may be the case as to the latter
      assertion, for which there appears little foundation, it is
      unquestionable that the Sadder is of much later date. The Abbé
      Foucher does not even believe it to be an extract from the works
      of Zoroaster. See his Diss. before quoted. Mem. de l’Acad. des
      Ins. t. xxvii.—G. Perhaps it is rash to speak of any part of the
      Zendavesta as the writing of Zoroaster, though it may be a
      genuine representation of his. As to the Sadder, Hyde (in Præf.)
      considered it not above 200 years old. It is manifestly
      post-Mahometan. See Art. xxv. on fasting.—M.]


      These convenient maxims of reverence and implicit faith were
      doubtless imprinted with care on the tender minds of youth; since
      the Magi were the masters of education in Persia, and to their
      hands the children even of the royal family were intrusted. 21
      The Persian priests, who were of a speculative genius, preserved
      and investigated the secrets of Oriental philosophy; and
      acquired, either by superior knowledge, or superior art, the
      reputation of being well versed in some occult sciences, which
      have derived their appellation from the Magi. 22 Those of more
      active dispositions mixed with the world in courts and cities;
      and it is observed, that the administration of Artaxerxes was in
      a great measure directed by the counsels of the sacerdotal order,
      whose dignity, either from policy or devotion, that prince
      restored to its ancient splendor. 23


      21 (return) [ Plato in Alcibiad.]


      22 (return) [ Pliny (Hist. Natur. l. xxx. c. 1) observes, that
      magic held mankind by the triple chain of religion, of physic,
      and of astronomy.]


      23 (return) [ Agathias, l. iv. p. 134.]


      The first counsel of the Magi was agreeable to the unsociable
      genius of their faith, 24 to the practice of ancient kings, 25
      and even to the example of their legislator, who had fallen a
      victim to a religious war, excited by his own intolerant zeal. 26
      By an edict of Artaxerxes, the exercise of every worship, except
      that of Zoroaster, was severely prohibited. The temples of the
      Parthians, and the statues of their deified monarchs, were thrown
      down with ignominy. 27 The sword of Aristotle (such was the name
      given by the Orientals to the polytheism and philosophy of the
      Greeks) was easily broken; 28 the flames of persecution soon
      reached the more stubborn Jews and Christians; 29 nor did they
      spare the heretics of their own nation and religion. The majesty
      of Ormusd, who was jealous of a rival, was seconded by the
      despotism of Artaxerxes, who could not suffer a rebel; and the
      schismatics within his vast empire were soon reduced to the
      inconsiderable number of eighty thousand. 30 301 This spirit of
      persecution reflects dishonor on the religion of Zoroaster; but
      as it was not productive of any civil commotion, it served to
      strengthen the new monarchy, by uniting all the various
      inhabitants of Persia in the bands of religious zeal. 302


      24 (return) [ Mr. Hume, in the Natural History of Religion,
      sagaciously remarks, that the most refined and philosophic sects
      are constantly the most intolerant. * Note: Hume’s comparison is
      rather between theism and polytheism. In India, in Greece, and in
      modern Europe, philosophic religion has looked down with
      contemptuous toleration on the superstitions of the vulgar.—M.]


      25 (return) [ Cicero de Legibus, ii. 10. Xerxes, by the advice of
      the Magi, destroyed the temples of Greece.]


      26 (return) [ Hyde de Relig. Persar. c. 23, 24. D’Herbelot,
      Bibliotheque Orientale, Zurdusht. Life of Zoroaster in tom. ii.
      of the Zendavesta.]


      27 (return) [ Compare Moses of Chorene, l. ii. c. 74, with
      Ammian. Marcel lin. xxiii. 6. Hereafter I shall make use of these
      passages.]


      28 (return) [ Rabbi Abraham, in the Tarikh Schickard, p. 108,
      109.]


      29 (return) [ Basnage, Histoire des Juifs, l. viii. c. 3.
      Sozomen, l. ii. c. 1 Manes, who suffered an ignominious death,
      may be deemed a Magian as well as a Christian heretic.]


      30 (return) [ Hyde de Religione Persar. c. 21.]


      301 (return) [ It is incorrect to attribute these persecutions to
      Artaxerxes. The Jews were held in honor by him, and their schools
      flourished during his reign. Compare Jost, Geschichte der
      Isræliter, b. xv. 5, with Basnage. Sapor was forced by the people
      to temporary severities; but their real persecution did not begin
      till the reigns of Yezdigerd and Kobad. Hist. of Jews, iii. 236.
      According to Sozomen, i. viii., Sapor first persecuted the
      Christians. Manes was put to death by Varanes the First, A. D.
      277. Beausobre, Hist. de Man. i. 209.—M.]


      302 (return) [ In the testament of Ardischer in Ferdusi, the poet
      assigns these sentiments to the dying king, as he addresses his
      son: Never forget that as a king, you are at once the protector
      of religion and of your country. Consider the altar and the
      throne as inseparable; they must always sustain each other.
      Malcolm’s Persia. i. 74—M]


      II. Artaxerxes, by his valor and conduct, had wrested the sceptre
      of the East from the ancient royal family of Parthia. There still
      remained the more difficult task of establishing, throughout the
      vast extent of Persia, a uniform and vigorous administration. The
      weak indulgence of the Arsacides had resigned to their sons and
      brothers the principal provinces, and the greatest offices of the
      kingdom in the nature of hereditary possessions. The _vitaxæ_, or
      eighteen most powerful satraps, were permitted to assume the
      regal title; and the vain pride of the monarch was delighted with
      a nominal dominion over so many vassal kings. Even tribes of
      barbarians in their mountains, and the Greek cities of Upper
      Asia, 31 within their walls, scarcely acknowledged, or seldom
      obeyed. any superior; and the Parthian empire exhibited, under
      other names, a lively image of the feudal system 32 which has
      since prevailed in Europe. But the active victor, at the head of
      a numerous and disciplined army, visited in person every province
      of Persia. The defeat of the boldest rebels, and the reduction of
      the strongest fortifications, 33 diffused the terror of his arms,
      and prepared the way for the peaceful reception of his authority.
      An obstinate resistance was fatal to the chiefs; but their
      followers were treated with lenity. 34 A cheerful submission was
      rewarded with honors and riches, but the prudent Artaxerxes,
      suffering no person except himself to assume the title of king,
      abolished every intermediate power between the throne and the
      people. His kingdom, nearly equal in extent to modern Persia,
      was, on every side, bounded by the sea, or by great rivers; by
      the Euphrates, the Tigris, the Araxes, the Oxus, and the Indus,
      by the Caspian Sea, and the Gulf of Persia. 35 That country was
      computed to contain, in the last century, five hundred and
      fifty-four cities, sixty thousand villages, and about forty
      millions of souls. 36 If we compare the administration of the
      house of Sassan with that of the house of Sefi, the political
      influence of the Magian with that of the Mahometan religion, we
      shall probably infer, that the kingdom of Artaxerxes contained at
      least as great a number of cities, villages, and inhabitants. But
      it must likewise be confessed, that in every age the want of
      harbors on the sea-coast, and the scarcity of fresh water in the
      inland provinces, have been very unfavorable to the commerce and
      agriculture of the Persians; who, in the calculation of their
      numbers, seem to have indulged one of the meanest, though most
      common, artifices of national vanity.


      31 (return) [ These colonies were extremely numerous. Seleucus
      Nicator founded thirty-nine cities, all named from himself, or
      some of his relations, (see Appian in Syriac. p. 124.) The æra of
      Seleucus (still in use among the eastern Christians) appears as
      late as the year 508, of Christ 196, on the medals of the Greek
      cities within the Parthian empire. See Moyle’s works, vol. i. p.
      273, &c., and M. Freret, Mem. de l’Academie, tom. xix.]


      32 (return) [ The modern Persians distinguish that period as the
      dynasty of the kings of the nations. See Plin. Hist. Nat. vi.
      25.]


      33 (return) [ Eutychius (tom. i. p. 367, 371, 375) relates the
      siege of the island of Mesene in the Tigris, with some
      circumstances not unlike the story of Nysus and Scylla.]


      34 (return) [ Agathias, ii. 64, [and iv. p. 260.] The princes of
      Segestan de fended their independence during many years. As
      romances generally transport to an ancient period the events of
      their own time, it is not impossible that the fabulous exploits
      of Rustan, Prince of Segestan, many have been grafted on this
      real history.]


      35 (return) [ We can scarcely attribute to the Persian monarchy
      the sea-coast of Gedrosia or Macran, which extends along the
      Indian Ocean from Cape Jask (the promontory Capella) to Cape
      Goadel. In the time of Alexander, and probably many ages
      afterwards, it was thinly inhabited by a savage people of
      Icthyophagi, or Fishermen, who knew no arts, who acknowledged no
      master, and who were divided by in-hospitable deserts from the
      rest of the world. (See Arrian de Reb. Indicis.) In the twelfth
      century, the little town of Taiz (supposed by M. d’Anville to be
      the Teza of Ptolemy) was peopled and enriched by the resort of
      the Arabian merchants. (See Geographia Nubiens, p. 58, and
      d’Anville, Geographie Ancienne, tom. ii. p. 283.) In the last
      age, the whole country was divided between three princes, one
      Mahometan and two Idolaters, who maintained their independence
      against the successors of Shah Abbas. (Voyages de Tavernier, part
      i. l. v. p. 635.)]


      36 (return) [ Chardin, tom. iii c 1 2, 3.]


      As soon as the ambitious mind of Artaxerxes had triumphed ever
      the resistance of his vassals, he began to threaten the
      neighboring states, who, during the long slumber of his
      predecessors, had insulted Persia with impunity. He obtained some
      easy victories over the wild Scythians and the effeminate
      Indians; but the Romans were an enemy, who, by their past
      injuries and present power, deserved the utmost efforts of his
      arms. A forty years’ tranquillity, the fruit of valor and
      moderation, had succeeded the victories of Trajan. During the
      period that elapsed from the accession of Marcus to the reign of
      Alexander, the Roman and the Parthian empires were twice engaged
      in war; and although the whole strength of the Arsacides
      contended with a part only of the forces of Rome, the event was
      most commonly in favor of the latter. Macrinus, indeed, prompted
      by his precarious situation and pusillanimous temper, purchased a
      peace at the expense of near two millions of our money; 37 but
      the generals of Marcus, the emperor Severus, and his son, erected
      many trophies in Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria. Among their
      exploits, the imperfect relation of which would have unseasonably
      interrupted the more important series of domestic revolutions, we
      shall only mention the repeated calamities of the two great
      cities of Seleucia and Ctesiphon.


      37 (return) [ Dion, l. xxviii. p. 1335.]


      Seleucia, on the western bank of the Tigris, about forty-five
      miles to the north of ancient Babylon, was the capital of the
      Macedonian conquests in Upper Asia. 38 Many ages after the fall
      of their empire, Seleucia retained the genuine characters of a
      Grecian colony, arts, military virtue, and the love of freedom.
      The independent republic was governed by a senate of three
      hundred nobles; the people consisted of six hundred thousand
      citizens; the walls were strong, and as long as concord prevailed
      among the several orders of the state, they viewed with contempt
      the power of the Parthian: but the madness of faction was
      sometimes provoked to implore the dangerous aid of the common
      enemy, who was posted almost at the gates of the colony. 39 The
      Parthian monarchs, like the Mogul sovereigns of Hindostan,
      delighted in the pastoral life of their Scythian ancestors; and
      the Imperial camp was frequently pitched in the plain of
      Ctesiphon, on the eastern bank of the Tigris, at the distance of
      only three miles from Seleucia. 40 The innumerable attendants on
      luxury and despotism resorted to the court, and the little
      village of Ctesiphon insensibly swelled into a great city. 41
      Under the reign of Marcus, the Roman generals penetrated as far
      as Ctesiphon and Seleucia. They were received as friends by the
      Greek colony; they attacked as enemies the seat of the Parthian
      kings; yet both cities experienced the same treatment. The sack
      and conflagration of Seleucia, with the massacre of three hundred
      thousand of the inhabitants, tarnished the glory of the Roman
      triumph. 42 Seleucia, already exhausted by the neighborhood of a
      too powerful rival, sunk under the fatal blow; but Ctesiphon, in
      about thirty-three years, had sufficiently recovered its strength
      to maintain an obstinate siege against the emperor Severus. The
      city was, however, taken by assault; the king, who defended it in
      person, escaped with precipitation; a hundred thousand captives,
      and a rich booty, rewarded the fatigues of the Roman soldiers. 43
      Notwithstanding these misfortunes, Ctesiphon succeeded to Babylon
      and to Seleucia, as one of the great capitals of the East. In
      summer, the monarch of Persia enjoyed at Ecbatana the cool
      breezes of the mountains of Media; but the mildness of the
      climate engaged him to prefer Ctesiphon for his winter residence.


      38 (return) [ For the precise situation of Babylon, Seleucia,
      Ctesiphon, Moiain, and Bagdad, cities often confounded with each
      other, see an excellent Geographical Tract of M. d’Anville, in
      Mem. de l’Academie, tom. xxx.]


      39 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xi. 42. Plin. Hist. Nat. vi. 26.]


      40 (return) [ This may be inferred from Strabo, l. xvi. p. 743.]


      41 (return) [ That most curious traveller, Bernier, who followed
      the camp of Aurengzebe from Delhi to Cashmir, describes with
      great accuracy the immense moving city. The guard of cavalry
      consisted of 35,000 men, that of infantry of 10,000. It was
      computed that the camp contained 150,000 horses, mules, and
      elephants; 50,000 camels, 50,000 oxen, and between 300,000 and
      400,000 persons. Almost all Delhi followed the court, whose
      magnificence supported its industry.]


      42 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxi. p. 1178. Hist. August. p. 38.
      Eutrop. viii. 10 Euseb. in Chronic. Quadratus (quoted in the
      Augustan History) attempted to vindicate the Romans by alleging
      that the citizens of Seleucia had first violated their faith.]


      43 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxv. p. 1263. Herodian, l. iii. p. 120.
      Hist. August. p. 70.]


      From these successful inroads the Romans derived no real or
      lasting benefit; nor did they attempt to preserve such distant
      conquests, separated from the provinces of the empire by a large
      tract of intermediate desert. The reduction of the kingdom of
      Osrhoene was an acquisition of less splendor indeed, but of a far
      more solid advantage. That little state occupied the northern and
      most fertile part of Mesopotamia, between the Euphrates and the
      Tigris. Edessa, its capital, was situated about twenty miles
      beyond the former of those rivers; and the inhabitants, since the
      time of Alexander, were a mixed race of Greeks, Arabs, Syrians,
      and Armenians. 44 The feeble sovereigns of Osrhoene, placed on
      the dangerous verge of two contending empires, were attached from
      inclination to the Parthian cause; but the superior power of Rome
      exacted from them a reluctant homage, which is still attested by
      their medals. After the conclusion of the Parthian war under
      Marcus, it was judged prudent to secure some substantial pledges
      of their doubtful fidelity. Forts were constructed in several
      parts of the country, and a Roman garrison was fixed in the
      strong town of Nisibis. During the troubles that followed the
      death of Commodus, the princes of Osrhoene attempted to shake off
      the yoke; but the stern policy of Severus confirmed their
      dependence, 45 and the perfidy of Caracalla completed the easy
      conquest. Abgarus, the last king of Edessa, was sent in chains to
      Rome, his dominions reduced into a province, and his capital
      dignified with the rank of colony; and thus the Romans, about ten
      years before the fall of the Parthian monarchy, obtained a firm
      and permanent establishment beyond the Euphrates. 46


      44 (return) [ The polished citizens of Antioch called those of
      Edessa mixed barbarians. It was, however, some praise, that of
      the three dialects of the Syriac, the purest and most elegant
      (the Aramæan) was spoken at Edessa. This remark M. Bayer (Hist.
      Edess. p 5) has borrowed from George of Malatia, a Syrian
      writer.]


      45 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxv. p. 1248, 1249, 1250. M. Bayer has
      neglected to use this most important passage.]


      46 (return) [ This kingdom, from Osrhoes, who gave a new name to
      the country, to the last Abgarus, had lasted 353 years. See the
      learned work of M. Bayer, Historia Osrhoena et Edessena.]


      Prudence as well as glory might have justified a war on the side
      of Artaxerxes, had his views been confined to the defence or
      acquisition of a useful frontier. but the ambitious Persian
      openly avowed a far more extensive design of conquest; and he
      thought himself able to support his lofty pretensions by the arms
      of reason as well as by those of power. Cyrus, he alleged, had
      first subdued, and his successors had for a long time possessed,
      the whole extent of Asia, as far as the Propontis and the Ægean
      Sea; the provinces of Caria and Ionia, under their empire, had
      been governed by Persian satraps, and all Egypt, to the confines
      of Æthiopia, had acknowledged their sovereignty. 47 Their rights
      had been suspended, but not destroyed, by a long usurpation; and
      as soon as he received the Persian diadem, which birth and
      successful valor had placed upon his head, the first great duty
      of his station called upon him to restore the ancient limits and
      splendor of the monarchy. The Great King, therefore, (such was
      the haughty style of his embassies to the emperor Alexander,)
      commanded the Romans instantly to depart from all the provinces
      of his ancestors, and, yielding to the Persians the empire of
      Asia, to content themselves with the undisturbed possession of
      Europe. This haughty mandate was delivered by four hundred of the
      tallest and most beautiful of the Persians; who, by their fine
      horses, splendid arms, and rich apparel, displayed the pride and
      greatness of their master. 48 Such an embassy was much less an
      offer of negotiation than a declaration of war. Both Alexander
      Severus and Artaxerxes, collecting the military force of the
      Roman and Persian monarchies, resolved in this important contest
      to lead their armies in person.


      47 (return) [ Xenophon, in the preface to the Cyropædia, gives a
      clear and magnificent idea of the extent of the empire of Cyrus.
      Herodotus (l. iii. c. 79, &c.) enters into a curious and
      particular description of the twenty great Satrapies into which
      the Persian empire was divided by Darius Hystaspes.]


      48 (return) [ Herodian, vi. 209, 212.]


      If we credit what should seem the most authentic of all records,
      an oration, still extant, and delivered by the emperor himself to
      the senate, we must allow that the victory of Alexander Severus
      was not inferior to any of those formerly obtained over the
      Persians by the son of Philip. The army of the Great King
      consisted of one hundred and twenty thousand horse, clothed in
      complete armor of steel; of seven hundred elephants, with towers
      filled with archers on their backs, and of eighteen hundred
      chariots armed with scythes. This formidable host, the like of
      which is not to be found in eastern history, and has scarcely
      been imagined in eastern romance, 49 was discomfited in a great
      battle, in which the Roman Alexander proved himself an intrepid
      soldier and a skilful general. The Great King fled before his
      valor; an immense booty, and the conquest of Mesopotamia, were
      the immediate fruits of this signal victory. Such are the
      circumstances of this ostentatious and improbable relation,
      dictated, as it too plainly appears, by the vanity of the
      monarch, adorned by the unblushing servility of his flatterers,
      and received without contradiction by a distant and obsequious
      senate. 50 Far from being inclined to believe that the arms of
      Alexander obtained any memorable advantage over the Persians, we
      are induced to suspect that all this blaze of imaginary glory was
      designed to conceal some real disgrace.


      49 (return) [ There were two hundred scythed chariots at the
      battle of Arbela, in the host of Darius. In the vast army of
      Tigranes, which was vanquished by Lucullus, seventeen thousand
      horse only were completely armed. Antiochus brought fifty-four
      elephants into the field against the Romans: by his frequent wars
      and negotiations with the princes of India, he had once collected
      a hundred and fifty of those great animals; but it may be
      questioned whether the most powerful monarch of Hindostan evci
      formed a line of battle of seven hundred elephants. Instead of
      three or four thousand elephants, which the Great Mogul was
      supposed to possess, Tavernier (Voyages, part ii. l. i. p. 198)
      discovered, by a more accurate inquiry, that he had only five
      hundred for his baggage, and eighty or ninety for the service of
      war. The Greeks have varied with regard to the number which Porus
      brought into the field; but Quintus Curtius, (viii. 13,) in this
      instance judicious and moderate, is contented with eighty-five
      elephants, distinguished by their size and strength. In Siam,
      where these animals are the most numerous and the most esteemed,
      eighteen elephants are allowed as a sufficient proportion for
      each of the nine brigades into which a just army is divided. The
      whole number, of one hundred and sixty-two elephants of war, may
      sometimes be doubled. Hist. des Voyages, tom. ix. p. 260. * Note:
      Compare Gibbon’s note 10 to ch. lvii—M.]


      50 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 133. * Note: See M. Guizot’s note,
      p. 267. According to the Persian authorities Ardeschir extended
      his conquests to the Euphrates. Malcolm i. 71.—M.]


      Our suspicions are confirmed by the authority of a contemporary
      historian, who mentions the virtues of Alexander with respect,
      and his faults with candor. He describes the judicious plan which
      had been formed for the conduct of the war. Three Roman armies
      were destined to invade Persia at the same time, and by different
      roads. But the operations of the campaign, though wisely
      concerted, were not executed either with ability or success. The
      first of these armies, as soon as it had entered the marshy
      plains of Babylon, towards the artificial conflux of the
      Euphrates and the Tigris, 51 was encompassed by the superior
      numbers, and destroyed by the arrows of the enemy. The alliance
      of Chosroes, king of Armenia, 52 and the long tract of
      mountainous country, in which the Persian cavalry was of little
      service, opened a secure entrance into the heart of Media, to the
      second of the Roman armies. These brave troops laid waste the
      adjacent provinces, and by several successful actions against
      Artaxerxes, gave a faint color to the emperor’s vanity. But the
      retreat of this victorious army was imprudent, or at least
      unfortunate. In repassing the mountains, great numbers of
      soldiers perished by the badness of the roads, and the severity
      of the winter season. It had been resolved, that whilst these two
      great detachments penetrated into the opposite extremes of the
      Persian dominions, the main body, under the command of Alexander
      himself, should support their attack, by invading the centre of
      the kingdom. But the unexperienced youth, influenced by his
      mother’s counsels, and perhaps by his own fears, deserted the
      bravest troops, and the fairest prospect of victory; and after
      consuming in Mesopotamia an inactive and inglorious summer, he
      led back to Antioch an army diminished by sickness, and provoked
      by disappointment. The behavior of Artaxerxes had been very
      different. Flying with rapidity from the hills of Media to the
      marshes of the Euphrates, he had everywhere opposed the invaders
      in person; and in either fortune had united with the ablest
      conduct the most undaunted resolution. But in several obstinate
      engagements against the veteran legions of Rome, the Persian
      monarch had lost the flower of his troops. Even his victories had
      weakened his power. The favorable opportunities of the absence of
      Alexander, and of the confusions that followed that emperor’s
      death, presented themselves in vain to his ambition. Instead of
      expelling the Romans, as he pretended, from the continent of
      Asia, he found himself unable to wrest from their hands the
      little province of Mesopotamia. 53


      51 (return) [ M. de Tillemont has already observed, that
      Herodian’s geography is somewhat confused.]


      52 (return) [ Moses of Chorene (Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 71)
      illustrates this invasion of Media, by asserting that Chosroes,
      king of Armenia, defeated Artaxerxes, and pursued him to the
      confines of India. The exploits of Chosroes have been magnified;
      and he acted as a dependent ally to the Romans.]


      53 (return) [ For the account of this war, see Herodian, l. vi.
      p. 209, 212. The old abbreviators and modern compilers have
      blindly followed the Augustan History.]


      The reign of Artaxerxes, which, from the last defeat of the
      Parthians, lasted only fourteen years, forms a memorable æra in
      the history of the East, and even in that of Rome. His character
      seems to have been marked by those bold and commanding features,
      that generally distinguish the princes who conquer, from those
      who inherit, an empire. Till the last period of the Persian
      monarchy, his code of laws was respected as the groundwork of
      their civil and religious policy. 54 Several of his sayings are
      preserved. One of them in particular discovers a deep insight
      into the constitution of government. “The authority of the
      prince,” said Artaxerxes, “must be defended by a military force;
      that force can only be maintained by taxes; all taxes must, at
      last, fall upon agriculture; and agriculture can never flourish
      except under the protection of justice and moderation.” 55
      Artaxerxes bequeathed his new empire, and his ambitious designs
      against the Romans, to Sapor, a son not unworthy of his great
      father; but those designs were too extensive for the power of
      Persia, and served only to involve both nations in a long series
      of destructive wars and reciprocal calamities.


      54 (return) [Eutychius, tom. ii. p. 180, vers. Pocock. The great
      Chosroes Noushirwan sent the code of Artaxerxes to all his
      satraps, as the invariable rule of their conduct.]


      55 (return) [ D’Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, au mot Ardshir.
      We may observe, that after an ancient period of fables, and a
      long interval of darkness, the modern histories of Persia begin
      to assume an air of truth with the dynasty of Sassanides. Compare
      Malcolm, i. 79.—M.]


      The Persians, long since civilized and corrupted, were very far
      from possessing the martial independence, and the intrepid
      hardiness, both of mind and body, which have rendered the
      northern barbarians masters of the world. The science of war,
      that constituted the more rational force of Greece and Rome, as
      it now does of Europe, never made any considerable progress in
      the East. Those disciplined evolutions which harmonize and
      animate a confused multitude, were unknown to the Persians. They
      were equally unskilled in the arts of constructing, besieging, or
      defending regular fortifications. They trusted more to their
      numbers than to their courage; more to their courage than to
      their discipline. The infantry was a half-armed, spiritless crowd
      of peasants, levied in haste by the allurements of plunder, and
      as easily dispersed by a victory as by a defeat. The monarch and
      his nobles transported into the camp the pride and luxury of the
      seraglio. Their military operations were impeded by a useless
      train of women, eunuchs, horses, and camels; and in the midst of
      a successful campaign, the Persian host was often separated or
      destroyed by an unexpected famine. 56


      56 (return) [ Herodian, l. vi. p. 214. Ammianus Marcellinus, l.
      xxiii. c. 6. Some differences may be observed between the two
      historians, the natural effects of the changes produced by a
      century and a half.]


      But the nobles of Persia, in the bosom of luxury and despotism,
      preserved a strong sense of personal gallantry and national
      honor. From the age of seven years they were taught to speak
      truth, to shoot with the bow, and to ride; and it was universally
      confessed that in the two last of these arts they had made a more
      than common proficiency. 57 The most distinguished youth were
      educated under the monarch’s eye, practised their exercises in
      the gate of his palace, and were severely trained up to the
      habits of temperance and obedience, in their long and laborious
      parties of hunting. In every province, the satrap maintained a
      like school of military virtue. The Persian nobles (so natural is
      the idea of feudal tenures) received from the king’s bounty lands
      and houses, on the condition of their service in war. They were
      ready on the first summons to mount on horseback, with a martial
      and splendid train of followers, and to join the numerous bodies
      of guards, who were carefully selected from among the most robust
      slaves, and the bravest adventurers of Asia. These armies, both
      of light and of heavy cavalry, equally formidable by the
      impetuosity of their charge and the rapidity of their motions,
      threatened, as an impending cloud, the eastern provinces of the
      declining empire of Rome. 58


      57 (return) [ The Persians are still the most skilful horsemen,
      and their horses the finest in the East.]


      58 (return) [ From Herodotus, Xenophon, Herodian, Ammianus,
      Chardin, &c., I have extracted such probable accounts of the
      Persian nobility, as seem either common to every age, or
      particular to that of the Sassanides.]


      Chapter IX: State Of Germany Until The Barbarians.—Part I.


The State Of Germany Till The Invasion Of The Barbarians In The Time Of
The Emperor Decius.


      The government and religion of Persia have deserved some notice,
      from their connection with the decline and fall of the Roman
      empire. We shall occasionally mention the Scythian or Sarmatian
      tribes, 1001 which, with their arms and horses, their flocks and
      herds, their wives and families, wandered over the immense plains
      which spread themselves from the Caspian Sea to the Vistula, from
      the confines of Persia to those of Germany. But the warlike
      Germans, who first resisted, then invaded, and at length
      overturned the Western monarchy of Rome, will occupy a much more
      important place in this history, and possess a stronger, and, if
      we may use the expression, a more domestic, claim to our
      attention and regard. The most civilized nations of modern Europe
      issued from the woods of Germany; and in the rude institutions of
      those barbarians we may still distinguish the original principles
      of our present laws and manners. In their primitive state of
      simplicity and independence, the Germans were surveyed by the
      discerning eye, and delineated by the masterly pencil, of
      Tacitus, 1002 the first of historians who applied the science of
      philosophy to the study of facts. The expressive conciseness of
      his descriptions has served to exercise the diligence of
      innumerable antiquarians, and to excite the genius and
      penetration of the philosophic historians of our own times. The
      subject, however various and important, has already been so
      frequently, so ably, and so successfully discussed, that it is
      now grown familiar to the reader, and difficult to the writer. We
      shall therefore content ourselves with observing, and indeed with
      repeating, some of the most important circumstances of climate,
      of manners, and of institutions, which rendered the wild
      barbarians of Germany such formidable enemies to the Roman power.


      1001 (return) [ The Scythians, even according to the ancients,
      are not Sarmatians. It may be doubted whether Gibbon intended to
      confound them.—M. ——The Greeks, after having divided the world
      into Greeks and barbarians. divided the barbarians into four
      great classes, the Celts, the Scythians, the Indians, and the
      Ethiopians. They called Celts all the inhabitants of Gaul.
      Scythia extended from the Baltic Sea to the Lake Aral: the people
      enclosed in the angle to the north-east, between Celtica and
      Scythia, were called Celto-Scythians, and the Sarmatians were
      placed in the southern part of that angle. But these names of
      Celts, of Scythians, of Celto-Scythians, and Sarmatians, were
      invented, says Schlozer, by the profound cosmographical ignorance
      of the Greeks, and have no real ground; they are purely
      geographical divisions, without any relation to the true
      affiliation of the different races. Thus all the inhabitants of
      Gaul are called Celts by most of the ancient writers; yet Gaul
      contained three totally distinct nations, the Belgæ, the
      Aquitani, and the Gauls, properly so called. Hi omnes lingua
      institutis, legibusque inter se differunt. Cæsar. Com. c. i. It
      is thus the Turks call all Europeans Franks. Schlozer, Allgemeine
      Nordische Geschichte, p. 289. 1771. Bayer (de Origine et priscis
      Sedibus Scytharum, in Opusc. p. 64) says, Primus eorum, de quibus
      constat, Ephorus, in quarto historiarum libro, orbem terrarum
      inter Scythas, Indos, Æthiopas et Celtas divisit. Fragmentum ejus
      loci Cosmas Indicopleustes in topographia Christiana, f. 148,
      conservavit. Video igitur Ephorum, cum locorum positus per certa
      capita distribuere et explicare constitueret, insigniorum nomina
      gentium vastioribus spatiis adhibuisse, nulla mala fraude et
      successu infelici. Nam Ephoro quoquomodo dicta pro exploratis
      habebant Græci plerique et Romani: ita gliscebat error
      posteritate. Igitur tot tamque diversæ stirpis gentes non modo
      intra communem quandam regionem definitæ, unum omnes Scytharum
      nomen his auctoribus subierunt, sed etiam ab illa regionis
      adpellatione in eandem nationem sunt conflatæ. Sic Cimmeriorum
      res cum Scythicis, Scytharum cum Sarmaticis, Russicis, Hunnicis,
      Tataricis commiscentur.—G.]


      1002 (return) [ The Germania of Tacitus has been a fruitful
      source of hypothesis to the ingenuity of modern writers, who have
      endeavored to account for the form of the work and the views of
      the author. According to Luden, (Geschichte des T. V. i. 432, and
      note,) it contains the unfinished and disarranged for a larger
      work. An anonymous writer, supposed by Luden to be M. Becker,
      conceives that it was intended as an episode in his larger
      history. According to M. Guizot, “Tacite a peint les Germains
      comme Montaigne et Rousseau les sauvages, dans un acces d’humeur
      contre sa patrie: son livre est une satire des mœurs Romaines,
      l’eloquente boutade d’un patriote philosophe qui veut voir la
      vertu la, ou il ne rencontre pas la mollesse honteuse et la
      depravation savante d’une vielle societe.” Hist. de la
      Civilisation Moderne, i. 258.—M.]


      Ancient Germany, excluding from its independent limits the
      province westward of the Rhine, which had submitted to the Roman
      yoke, extended itself over a third part of Europe. 1 Almost the
      whole of modern Germany, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland,
      Livonia, Prussia, and the greater part of Poland, were peopled by
      the various tribes of one great nation, whose complexion,
      manners, and language denoted a common origin, and preserved a
      striking resemblance. On the west, ancient Germany was divided by
      the Rhine from the Gallic, and on the south, by the Danube, from
      the Illyrian, provinces of the empire. A ridge of hills, rising
      from the Danube, and called the Carpathian Mountains, covered
      Germany on the side of Dacia or Hungary. The eastern frontier was
      faintly marked by the mutual fears of the Germans and the
      Sarmatians, and was often confounded by the mixture of warring
      and confederating tribes of the two nations. In the remote
      darkness of the north, the ancients imperfectly descried a frozen
      ocean that lay beyond the Baltic Sea, and beyond the Peninsula,
      or islands 1001a of Scandinavia.


      1 (return) [ Germany was not of such vast extent. It is from
      Cæsar, and more particularly from Ptolemy, (says Gatterer,) that
      we can know what was the state of ancient Germany before the wars
      with the Romans had changed the positions of the tribes. Germany,
      as changed by these wars, has been described by Strabo, Pliny,
      and Tacitus. Germany, properly so called, was bounded on the west
      by the Rhine, on the east by the Vistula, on the north by the
      southern point of Norway, by Sweden, and Esthonia. On the south,
      the Maine and the mountains to the north of Bohemia formed the
      limits. Before the time of Cæsar, the country between the Maine
      and the Danube was partly occupied by the Helvetians and other
      Gauls, partly by the Hercynian forest but, from the time of Cæsar
      to the great migration, these boundaries were advanced as far as
      the Danube, or, what is the same thing, to the Suabian Alps,
      although the Hercynian forest still occupied, from north to
      south, a space of nine days’ journey on both banks of the Danube.
      “Gatterer, Versuch einer all-gemeinen Welt-Geschichte,” p. 424,
      edit. de 1792. This vast country was far from being inhabited by
      a single nation divided into different tribes of the same origin.
      We may reckon three principal races, very distinct in their
      language, their origin, and their customs. 1. To the east, the
      Slaves or Vandals. 2. To the west, the Cimmerians or Cimbri. 3.
      Between the Slaves and Cimbrians, the Germans, properly so
      called, the Suevi of Tacitus. The South was inhabited, before
      Julius Cæsar, by nations of Gaulish origin, afterwards by the
      Suevi.—G. On the position of these nations, the German
      antiquaries differ. I. The Slaves, or Sclavonians, or Wendish
      tribes, according to Schlozer, were originally settled in parts
      of Germany unknown to the Romans, Mecklenburgh, Pomerania,
      Brandenburgh, Upper Saxony; and Lusatia. According to Gatterer,
      they remained to the east of the Theiss, the Niemen, and the
      Vistula, till the third century. The Slaves, according to
      Procopius and Jornandes, formed three great divisions. 1. The
      Venedi or Vandals, who took the latter name, (the Wenden,) having
      expelled the Vandals, properly so called, (a Suevian race, the
      conquerors of Africa,) from the country between the Memel and the
      Vistula. 2. The Antes, who inhabited between the Dneister and the
      Dnieper. 3. The Sclavonians, properly so called, in the north of
      Dacia. During the great migration, these races advanced into
      Germany as far as the Saal and the Elbe. The Sclavonian language
      is the stem from which have issued the Russian, the Polish, the
      Bohemian, and the dialects of Lusatia, of some parts of the duchy
      of Luneburgh, of Carniola, Carinthia, and Styria, &c.; those of
      Croatia, Bosnia, and Bulgaria. Schlozer, Nordische Geschichte, p.
      323, 335. II. The Cimbric race. Adelung calls by this name all
      who were not Suevi. This race had passed the Rhine, before the
      time of Cæsar, occupied Belgium, and are the Belgæ of Cæsar and
      Pliny. The Cimbrians also occupied the Isle of Jutland. The Cymri
      of Wales and of Britain are of this race. Many tribes on the
      right bank of the Rhine, the Guthini in Jutland, the Usipeti in
      Westphalia, the Sigambri in the duchy of Berg, were German
      Cimbrians. III. The Suevi, known in very early times by the
      Romans, for they are mentioned by L. Corn. Sisenna, who lived 123
      years before Christ, (Nonius v. Lancea.) This race, the real
      Germans, extended to the Vistula, and from the Baltic to the
      Hercynian forest. The name of Suevi was sometimes confined to a
      single tribe, as by Cæsar to the Catti. The name of the Suevi has
      been preserved in Suabia. These three were the principal races
      which inhabited Germany; they moved from east to west, and are
      the parent stem of the modern natives. But northern Europe,
      according to Schlozer, was not peopled by them alone; other
      races, of different origin, and speaking different languages,
      have inhabited and left descendants in these countries. The
      German tribes called themselves, from very remote times, by the
      generic name of Teutons, (Teuten, Deutschen,) which Tacitus
      derives from that of one of their gods, Tuisco. It appears more
      probable that it means merely men, people. Many savage nations
      have given themselves no other name. Thus the Laplanders call
      themselves Almag, people; the Samoiedes Nilletz, Nissetsch, men,
      &c. As to the name of Germans, (Germani,) Cæsar found it in use
      in Gaul, and adopted it as a word already known to the Romans.
      Many of the learned (from a passage of Tacitus, de Mor Germ. c.
      2) have supposed that it was only applied to the Teutons after
      Cæsar’s time; but Adelung has triumphantly refuted this opinion.
      The name of Germans is found in the Fasti Capitolini. See Gruter,
      Iscrip. 2899, in which the consul Marcellus, in the year of Rome
      531, is said to have defeated the Gauls, the Insubrians, and the
      Germans, commanded by Virdomar. See Adelung, Ælt. Geschichte der
      Deutsch, p. 102.—Compressed from G.]


      1001a (return) [ The modern philosophers of Sweden seem agreed
      that the waters of the Baltic gradually sink in a regular
      proportion, which they have ventured to estimate at half an inch
      every year. Twenty centuries ago the flat country of Scandinavia
      must have been covered by the sea; while the high lands rose
      above the waters, as so many islands of various forms and
      dimensions. Such, indeed, is the notion given us by Mela, Pliny,
      and Tacitus, of the vast countries round the Baltic. See in the
      Bibliotheque Raisonnee, tom. xl. and xlv. a large abstract of
      Dalin’s History of Sweden, composed in the Swedish language. *
      Note: Modern geologists have rejected this theory of the
      depression of the Baltic, as inconsistent with recent
      observation. The considerable changes which have taken place on
      its shores, Mr. Lyell, from actual observation now decidedly
      attributes to the regular and uniform elevation of the
      land.—Lyell’s Geology, b. ii. c. 17—M.]


      Some ingenious writers 2 have suspected that Europe was much
      colder formerly than it is at present; and the most ancient
      descriptions of the climate of Germany tend exceedingly to
      confirm their theory. The general complaints of intense frost and
      eternal winter are perhaps little to be regarded, since we have
      no method of reducing to the accurate standard of the
      thermometer, the feelings, or the expressions, of an orator born
      in the happier regions of Greece or Asia. But I shall select two
      remarkable circumstances of a less equivocal nature. 1. The great
      rivers which covered the Roman provinces, the Rhine and the
      Danube, were frequently frozen over, and capable of supporting
      the most enormous weights. The barbarians, who often chose that
      severe season for their inroads, transported, without
      apprehension or danger, their numerous armies, their cavalry, and
      their heavy wagons, over a vast and solid bridge of ice. 3 Modern
      ages have not presented an instance of a like phenomenon. 2. The
      reindeer, that useful animal, from whom the savage of the North
      derives the best comforts of his dreary life, is of a
      constitution that supports, and even requires, the most intense
      cold. He is found on the rock of Spitzberg, within ten degrees of
      the Pole; he seems to delight in the snows of Lapland and
      Siberia: but at present he cannot subsist, much less multiply, in
      any country to the south of the Baltic. 4 In the time of Cæsar
      the reindeer, as well as the elk and the wild bull, was a native
      of the Hercynian forest, which then overshadowed a great part of
      Germany and Poland. 5 The modern improvements sufficiently
      explain the causes of the diminution of the cold. These immense
      woods have been gradually cleared, which intercepted from the
      earth the rays of the sun. 6 The morasses have been drained, and,
      in proportion as the soil has been cultivated, the air has become
      more temperate. Canada, at this day, is an exact picture of
      ancient Germany. Although situated in the same parallel with the
      finest provinces of France and England, that country experiences
      the most rigorous cold. The reindeer are very numerous, the
      ground is covered with deep and lasting snow, and the great river
      of St. Lawrence is regularly frozen, in a season when the waters
      of the Seine and the Thames are usually free from ice. 7


      2 (return) [ In particular, Mr. Hume, the Abbé du Bos, and M.
      Pelloutier. Hist. des Celtes, tom. i.]


      3 (return) [ Diodorus Siculus, l. v. p. 340, edit. Wessel.
      Herodian, l. vi. p. 221. Jornandes, c. 55. On the banks of the
      Danube, the wine, when brought to table, was frequently frozen
      into great lumps, frusta vini. Ovid. Epist. ex Ponto, l. iv. 7,
      9, 10. Virgil. Georgic. l. iii. 355. The fact is confirmed by a
      soldier and a philosopher, who had experienced the intense cold
      of Thrace. See Xenophon, Anabasis, l. vii. p. 560, edit.
      Hutchinson. Note: The Danube is constantly frozen over. At Pesth
      the bridge is usually taken up, and the traffic and communication
      between the two banks carried on over the ice. The Rhine is
      likewise in many parts passable at least two years out of five.
      Winter campaigns are so unusual, in modern warfare, that I
      recollect but one instance of an army crossing either river on
      the ice. In the thirty years’ war, (1635,) Jan van Werth, an
      Imperialist partisan, crossed the Rhine from Heidelberg on the
      ice with 5000 men, and surprised Spiers. Pichegru’s memorable
      campaign, (1794-5,) when the freezing of the Meuse and Waal
      opened Holland to his conquests, and his cavalry and artillery
      attacked the ships frozen in, on the Zuyder Zee, was in a winter
      of unprecedented severity.—M. 1845.]


      4 (return) [ Buffon, Histoire Naturelle, tom. xii. p. 79, 116.]


      5 (return) [ Cæsar de Bell. Gallic. vi. 23, &c. The most
      inquisitive of the Germans were ignorant of its utmost limits,
      although some of them had travelled in it more than sixty days’
      journey. * Note: The passage of Cæsar, “parvis renonum tegumentis
      utuntur,” is obscure, observes Luden, (Geschichte des Teutschen
      Volkes,) and insufficient to prove the reindeer to have existed
      in Germany. It is supported however, by a fragment of Sallust.
      Germani intectum rhenonibus corpus tegunt.—M. It has been
      suggested to me that Cæsar (as old Gesner supposed) meant the
      reindeer in the following description. Est bos cervi figura cujus
      a media fronte inter aures unum cornu existit, excelsius magisque
      directum (divaricatum, qu?) his quæ nobis nota sunt cornibus. At
      ejus summo, sicut palmæ, rami quam late diffunduntur. Bell.
      vi.—M. 1845.]


      6 (return) [ Cluverius (Germania Antiqua, l. iii. c. 47)
      investigates the small and scattered remains of the Hercynian
      wood.]


      7 (return) [ Charlevoix, Histoire du Canada.]


      It is difficult to ascertain, and easy to exaggerate, the
      influence of the climate of ancient Germany over the minds and
      bodies of the natives. Many writers have supposed, and most have
      allowed, though, as it should seem, without any adequate proof,
      that the rigorous cold of the North was favorable to long life
      and generative vigor, that the women were more fruitful, and the
      human species more prolific, than in warmer or more temperate
      climates. 8 We may assert, with greater confidence, that the keen
      air of Germany formed the large and masculine limbs of the
      natives, who were, in general, of a more lofty stature than the
      people of the South, 9 gave them a kind of strength better
      adapted to violent exertions than to patient labor, and inspired
      them with constitutional bravery, which is the result of nerves
      and spirits. The severity of a winter campaign, that chilled the
      courage of the Roman troops, was scarcely felt by these hardy
      children of the North, 10 who, in their turn, were unable to
      resist the summer heats, and dissolved away in languor and
      sickness under the beams of an Italian sun. 11


      8 (return) [ Olaus Rudbeck asserts that the Swedish women often
      bear ten or twelve children, and not uncommonly twenty or thirty;
      but the authority of Rudbeck is much to be suspected.]


      9 (return) [ In hos artus, in hæc corpora, quæ miramur,
      excrescunt. Tæit Germania, 3, 20. Cluver. l. i. c. 14.]


      10 (return) [ Plutarch. in Mario. The Cimbri, by way of
      amusement, often did down mountains of snow on their broad
      shields.]


      11 (return) [ The Romans made war in all climates, and by their
      excellent discipline were in a great measure preserved in health
      and vigor. It may be remarked, that man is the only animal which
      can live and multiply in every country from the equator to the
      poles. The hog seems to approach the nearest to our species in
      that privilege.]


      Chapter IX: State Of Germany Until The Barbarians.—Part II.


      There is not anywhere upon the globe a large tract of country,
      which we have discovered destitute of inhabitants, or whose first
      population can be fixed with any degree of historical certainty.
      And yet, as the most philosophic minds can seldom refrain from
      investigating the infancy of great nations, our curiosity
      consumes itself in toilsome and disappointed efforts. When
      Tacitus considered the purity of the German blood, and the
      forbidding aspect of the country, he was disposed to pronounce
      those barbarians _Indigenæ_, or natives of the soil. We may allow
      with safety, and perhaps with truth, that ancient Germany was not
      originally peopled by any foreign colonies already formed into a
      political society; 12 but that the name and nation received their
      existence from the gradual union of some wandering savages of the
      Hercynian woods. To assert those savages to have been the
      spontaneous production of the earth which they inhabited would be
      a rash inference, condemned by religion, and unwarranted by
      reason.


      12 (return) [ Facit. Germ. c. 3. The emigration of the Gauls
      followed the course of the Danube, and discharged itself on
      Greece and Asia. Tacitus could discover only one inconsiderable
      tribe that retained any traces of a Gallic origin. * Note: The
      Gothini, who must not be confounded with the Gothi, a Suevian
      tribe. In the time of Cæsar many other tribes of Gaulish origin
      dwelt along the course of the Danube, who could not long resist
      the attacks of the Suevi. The Helvetians, who dwelt on the
      borders of the Black Forest, between the Maine and the Danube,
      had been expelled long before the time of Cæsar. He mentions also
      the Volci Tectosagi, who came from Languedoc and settled round
      the Black Forest. The Boii, who had penetrated into that forest,
      and also have left traces of their name in Bohemia, were subdued
      in the first century by the Marcomanni. The Boii settled in
      Noricum, were mingled afterwards with the Lombards, and received
      the name of Boio Arii (Bavaria) or Boiovarii: var, in some German
      dialects, appearing to mean remains, descendants. Compare Malte
      B-m, Geography, vol. i. p. 410, edit 1832—M.]


      Such rational doubt is but ill suited with the genius of popular
      vanity. Among the nations who have adopted the Mosaic history of
      the world, the ark of Noah has been of the same use, as was
      formerly to the Greeks and Romans the siege of Troy. On a narrow
      basis of acknowledged truth, an immense but rude superstructure
      of fable has been erected; and the wild Irishman, 13 as well as
      the wild Tartar, 14 could point out the individual son of Japhet,
      from whose loins his ancestors were lineally descended. The last
      century abounded with antiquarians of profound learning and easy
      faith, who, by the dim light of legends and traditions, of
      conjectures and etymologies, conducted the great grandchildren of
      Noah from the Tower of Babel to the extremities of the globe. Of
      these judicious critics, one of the most entertaining was Olaus
      Rudbeck, professor in the university of Upsal. 15 Whatever is
      celebrated either in history or fable this zealous patriot
      ascribes to his country. From Sweden (which formed so
      considerable a part of ancient Germany) the Greeks themselves
      derived their alphabetical characters, their astronomy, and their
      religion. Of that delightful region (for such it appeared to the
      eyes of a native) the Atlantis of Plato, the country of the
      Hyperboreans, the gardens of the Hesperides, the Fortunate
      Islands, and even the Elysian Fields, were all but faint and
      imperfect transcripts. A clime so profusely favored by Nature
      could not long remain desert after the flood. The learned Rudbeck
      allows the family of Noah a few years to multiply from eight to
      about twenty thousand persons. He then disperses them into small
      colonies to replenish the earth, and to propagate the human
      species. The German or Swedish detachment (which marched, if I am
      not mistaken, under the command of Askenaz, the son of Gomer, the
      son of Japhet) distinguished itself by a more than common
      diligence in the prosecution of this great work. The northern
      hive cast its swarms over the greatest part of Europe, Africa,
      and Asia; and (to use the author’s metaphor) the blood circulated
      from the extremities to the heart.


      13 (return) [ According to Dr. Keating, (History of Ireland, p.
      13, 14,) the giant Portholanus, who was the son of Seara, the son
      of Esra, the son of Sru, the son of Framant, the son of
      Fathaclan, the son of Magog, the son of Japhet, the son of Noah,
      landed on the coast of Munster the 14th day of May, in the year
      of the world one thousand nine hundred and seventy-eight. Though
      he succeeded in his great enterprise, the loose behavior of his
      wife rendered his domestic life very unhappy, and provoked him to
      such a degree, that he killed—her favorite greyhound. This, as
      the learned historian very properly observes, was the first
      instance of female falsehood and infidelity ever known in
      Ireland.]


      14 (return) [ Genealogical History of the Tartars, by Abulghazi
      Bahadur Khan.]


      15 (return) [ His work, entitled Atlantica, is uncommonly scarce.
      Bayle has given two most curious extracts from it. Republique des
      Lettres Janvier et Fevrier, 1685.]


      But all this well-labored system of German antiquities is
      annihilated by a single fact, too well attested to admit of any
      doubt, and of too decisive a nature to leave room for any reply.
      The Germans, in the age of Tacitus, were unacquainted with the
      use of letters; 16 and the use of letters is the principal
      circumstance that distinguishes a civilized people from a herd of
      savages incapable of knowledge or reflection. Without that
      artificial help, the human memory soon dissipates or corrupts the
      ideas intrusted to her charge; and the nobler faculties of the
      mind, no longer supplied with models or with materials, gradually
      forget their powers; the judgment becomes feeble and lethargic,
      the imagination languid or irregular. Fully to apprehend this
      important truth, let us attempt, in an improved society, to
      calculate the immense distance between the man of learning and
      the _illiterate_ peasant. The former, by reading and reflection,
      multiplies his own experience, and lives in distant ages and
      remote countries; whilst the latter, rooted to a single spot, and
      confined to a few years of existence, surpasses but very little
      his fellow-laborer, the ox, in the exercise of his mental
      faculties. The same, and even a greater, difference will be found
      between nations than between individuals; and we may safely
      pronounce, that without some species of writing, no people has
      ever preserved the faithful annals of their history, ever made
      any considerable progress in the abstract sciences, or ever
      possessed, in any tolerable degree of perfection, the useful and
      agreeable arts of life.


      16 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. ii. 19. Literarum secreta viri pariter
      ac fœminæ ignorant. We may rest contented with this decisive
      authority, without entering into the obscure disputes concerning
      the antiquity of the Runic characters. The learned Celsius, a
      Swede, a scholar, and a philosopher, was of opinion, that they
      were nothing more than the Roman letters, with the curves changed
      into straight lines for the ease of engraving. See Pelloutier,
      Histoire des Celtes, l. ii. c. 11. Dictionnaire Diplomatique,
      tom. i. p. 223. We may add, that the oldest Runic inscriptions
      are supposed to be of the third century, and the most ancient
      writer who mentions the Runic characters is Venan tius
      Frotunatus, (Carm. vii. 18,) who lived towards the end of the
      sixth century. Barbara fraxineis pingatur Runa tabellis. * Note:
      The obscure subject of the Runic characters has exercised the
      industry and ingenuity of the modern scholars of the north. There
      are three distinct theories; one, maintained by Schlozer,
      (Nordische Geschichte, p. 481, &c.,) who considers their sixteen
      letters to be a corruption of the Roman alphabet, post-Christian
      in their date, and Schlozer would attribute their introduction
      into the north to the Alemanni. The second, that of Frederick
      Schlegel, (Vorlesungen uber alte und neue Literatur,) supposes
      that these characters were left on the coasts of the
      Mediterranean and Northern Seas by the Phœnicians, preserved by
      the priestly castes, and employed for purposes of magic. Their
      common origin from the Phœnician would account for heir
      similarity to the Roman letters. The last, to which we incline,
      claims much higher and more venerable antiquity for the Runic,
      and supposes them to have been the original characters of the
      Indo-Teutonic tribes, brought from the East, and preserved among
      the different races of that stock. See Ueber Deutsche Runen von
      W. C. Grimm, 1821. A Memoir by Dr. Legis. Fundgruben des alten
      Nordens. Foreign Quarterly Review vol. ix. p. 438.—M.]


      Of these arts, the ancient Germans were wretchedly destitute.
      1601 They passed their lives in a state of ignorance and poverty,
      which it has pleased some declaimers to dignify with the
      appellation of virtuous simplicity. Modern Germany is said to
      contain about two thousand three hundred walled towns. 17 In a
      much wider extent of country, the geographer Ptolemy could
      discover no more than ninety places which he decorates with the
      name of cities; 18 though, according to our ideas, they would but
      ill deserve that splendid title. We can only suppose them to have
      been rude fortifications, constructed in the centre of the woods,
      and designed to secure the women, children, and cattle, whilst
      the warriors of the tribe marched out to repel a sudden invasion.
      19 But Tacitus asserts, as a well-known fact, that the Germans,
      in his time, had _no_ cities; 20 and that they affected to
      despise the works of Roman industry, as places of confinement
      rather than of security. 21 Their edifices were not even
      contiguous, or formed into regular villas; 22 each barbarian
      fixed his independent dwelling on the spot to which a plain, a
      wood, or a stream of fresh water, had induced him to give the
      preference. Neither stone, nor brick, nor tiles, were employed in
      these slight habitations. 23 They were indeed no more than low
      huts, of a circular figure, built of rough timber, thatched with
      straw, and pierced at the top to leave a free passage for the
      smoke. In the most inclement winter, the hardy German was
      satisfied with a scanty garment made of the skin of some animal.
      The nations who dwelt towards the North clothed themselves in
      furs; and the women manufactured for their own use a coarse kind
      of linen. 24 The game of various sorts, with which the forests of
      Germany were plentifully stocked, supplied its inhabitants with
      food and exercise. 25 Their monstrous herds of cattle, less
      remarkable indeed for their beauty than for their utility, 26
      formed the principal object of their wealth. A small quantity of
      corn was the only produce exacted from the earth; the use of
      orchards or artificial meadows was unknown to the Germans; nor
      can we expect any improvements in agriculture from a people,
      whose prosperity every year experienced a general change by a new
      division of the arable lands, and who, in that strange operation,
      avoided disputes, by suffering a great part of their territory to
      lie waste and without tillage. 27


      1601 (return) [ Luden (the author of the Geschichte des Teutschen
      Volkes) has surpassed most writers in his patriotic enthusiasm
      for the virtues and noble manners of his ancestors. Even the cold
      of the climate, and the want of vines and fruit trees, as well as
      the barbarism of the inhabitants, are calumnies of the luxurious
      Italians. M. Guizot, on the other side, (in his Histoire de la
      Civilisation, vol. i. p. 272, &c.,) has drawn a curious parallel
      between the Germans of Tacitus and the North American
      Indians.—M.]


      17 (return) [ Recherches Philosophiques sur les Americains, tom.
      iii. p. 228. The author of that very curious work is, if I am not
      misinformed, a German by birth. (De Pauw.)]


      18 (return) [ The Alexandrian Geographer is often criticized by
      the accurate Cluverius.]


      19 (return) [ See Cæsar, and the learned Mr. Whitaker in his
      History of Manchester, vol. i.]


      20 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. 15.]


      21 (return) [ When the Germans commanded the Ubii of Cologne to
      cast off the Roman yoke, and with their new freedom to resume
      their ancient manners, they insisted on the immediate demolition
      of the walls of the colony. “Postulamus a vobis, muros coloniæ,
      munimenta servitii, detrahatis; etiam fera animalia, si clausa
      teneas, virtutis obliviscuntur.” Tacit. Hist. iv. 64.]


      22 (return) [ The straggling villages of Silesia are several
      miles in length. See Cluver. l. i. c. 13.]


      23 (return) [ One hundred and forty years after Tacitus, a few
      more regular structures were erected near the Rhine and Danube.
      Herodian, l. vii. p. 234.]


      24 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. 17.]


      25 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. 5.]


      26 (return) [ Cæsar de Bell. Gall. vi. 21.]


      27 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. 26. Cæsar, vi. 22.]


      Gold, silver, and iron, were extremely scarce in Germany. Its
      barbarous inhabitants wanted both skill and patience to
      investigate those rich veins of silver, which have so liberally
      rewarded the attention of the princes of Brunswick and Saxony.
      Sweden, which now supplies Europe with iron, was equally ignorant
      of its own riches; and the appearance of the arms of the Germans
      furnished a sufficient proof how little iron they were able to
      bestow on what they must have deemed the noblest use of that
      metal. The various transactions of peace and war had introduced
      some Roman coins (chiefly silver) among the borderers of the
      Rhine and Danube; but the more distant tribes were absolutely
      unacquainted with the use of money, carried on their confined
      traffic by the exchange of commodities, and prized their rude
      earthen vessels as of equal value with the silver vases, the
      presents of Rome to their princes and ambassadors. 28 To a mind
      capable of reflection, such leading facts convey more
      instruction, than a tedious detail of subordinate circumstances.
      The value of money has been settled by general consent to express
      our wants and our property, as letters were invented to express
      our ideas; and both these institutions, by giving a more active
      energy to the powers and passions of human nature, have
      contributed to multiply the objects they were designed to
      represent. The use of gold and silver is in a great measure
      factitious; but it would be impossible to enumerate the important
      and various services which agriculture, and all the arts, have
      received from iron, when tempered and fashioned by the operation
      of fire and the dexterous hand of man. Money, in a word, is the
      most universal incitement, iron the most powerful instrument, of
      human industry; and it is very difficult to conceive by what
      means a people, neither actuated by the one, nor seconded by the
      other, could emerge from the grossest barbarism. 29


      28 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. 6.]


      29 (return) [ It is said that the Mexicans and Peruvians, without
      the use of either money or iron, had made a very great progress
      in the arts. Those arts, and the monuments they produced, have
      been strangely magnified. See Recherches sur les Americains, tom.
      ii. p. 153, &c]


      If we contemplate a savage nation in any part of the globe, a
      supine indolence and a carelessness of futurity will be found to
      constitute their general character. In a civilized state every
      faculty of man is expanded and exercised; and the great chain of
      mutual dependence connects and embraces the several members of
      society. The most numerous portion of it is employed in constant
      and useful labor. The select few, placed by fortune above that
      necessity, can, however, fill up their time by the pursuits of
      interest or glory, by the improvement of their estate or of their
      understanding, by the duties, the pleasures, and even the follies
      of social life. The Germans were not possessed of these varied
      resources. The care of the house and family, the management of
      the land and cattle, were delegated to the old and the infirm, to
      women and slaves. The lazy warrior, destitute of every art that
      might employ his leisure hours, consumed his days and nights in
      the animal gratifications of sleep and food. And yet, by a
      wonderful diversity of nature, (according to the remark of a
      writer who had pierced into its darkest recesses,) the same
      barbarians are by turns the most indolent and the most restless
      of mankind. They delight in sloth, they detest tranquility. 30
      The languid soul, oppressed with its own weight, anxiously
      required some new and powerful sensation; and war and danger were
      the only amusements adequate to its fierce temper. The sound that
      summoned the German to arms was grateful to his ear. It roused
      him from his uncomfortable lethargy, gave him an active pursuit,
      and, by strong exercise of the body, and violent emotions of the
      mind, restored him to a more lively sense of his existence. In
      the dull intervals of peace, these barbarians were immoderately
      addicted to deep gaming and excessive drinking; both of which, by
      different means, the one by inflaming their passions, the other
      by extinguishing their reason, alike relieved them from the pain
      of thinking. They gloried in passing whole days and nights at
      table; and the blood of friends and relations often stained their
      numerous and drunken assemblies. 31 Their debts of honor (for in
      that light they have transmitted to us those of play) they
      discharged with the most romantic fidelity. The desperate
      gamester, who had staked his person and liberty on a last throw
      of the dice, patiently submitted to the decision of fortune, and
      suffered himself to be bound, chastised, and sold into remote
      slavery, by his weaker but more lucky antagonist. 32


      30 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. 15.]


      31 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. 22, 23.]


      32 (return) [ Id. 24. The Germans might borrow the arts of play
      from the Romans, but the passion is wonderfully inherent in the
      human species.]


      Strong beer, a liquor extracted with very little art from wheat
      or barley, and _corrupted_ (as it is strongly expressed by
      Tacitus) into a certain semblance of wine, was sufficient for the
      gross purposes of German debauchery. But those who had tasted the
      rich wines of Italy, and afterwards of Gaul, sighed for that more
      delicious species of intoxication. They attempted not, however,
      (as has since been executed with so much success,) to naturalize
      the vine on the banks of the Rhine and Danube; nor did they
      endeavor to procure by industry the materials of an advantageous
      commerce. To solicit by labor what might be ravished by arms, was
      esteemed unworthy of the German spirit. 33 The intemperate thirst
      of strong liquors often urged the barbarians to invade the
      provinces on which art or nature had bestowed those much envied
      presents. The Tuscan who betrayed his country to the Celtic
      nations, attracted them into Italy by the prospect of the rich
      fruits and delicious wines, the productions of a happier climate.
      34 And in the same manner the German auxiliaries, invited into
      France during the civil wars of the sixteenth century, were
      allured by the promise of plenteous quarters in the provinces of
      Champaigne and Burgundy. 35 Drunkenness, the most illiberal, but
      not the most dangerous of _our_ vices, was sometimes capable, in
      a less civilized state of mankind, of occasioning a battle, a
      war, or a revolution.


      33 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. 14.]


      34 (return) [ Plutarch. in Camillo. T. Liv. v. 33.]


      35 (return) [ Dubos. Hist. de la Monarchie Francoise, tom. i. p.
      193.]


      The climate of ancient Germany has been modified, and the soil
      fertilized, by the labor of ten centuries from the time of
      Charlemagne. The same extent of ground which at present
      maintains, in ease and plenty, a million of husbandmen and
      artificers, was unable to supply a hundred thousand lazy warriors
      with the simple necessaries of life. 36 The Germans abandoned
      their immense forests to the exercise of hunting, employed in
      pasturage the most considerable part of their lands, bestowed on
      the small remainder a rude and careless cultivation, and then
      accused the scantiness and sterility of a country that refused to
      maintain the multitude of its inhabitants. When the return of
      famine severely admonished them of the importance of the arts,
      the national distress was sometimes alleviated by the emigration
      of a third, perhaps, or a fourth part of their youth. 37 The
      possession and the enjoyment of property are the pledges which
      bind a civilized people to an improved country. But the Germans,
      who carried with them what they most valued, their arms, their
      cattle, and their women, cheerfully abandoned the vast silence of
      their woods for the unbounded hopes of plunder and conquest. The
      innumerable swarms that issued, or seemed to issue, from the
      great storehouse of nations, were multiplied by the fears of the
      vanquished, and by the credulity of succeeding ages. And from
      facts thus exaggerated, an opinion was gradually established, and
      has been supported by writers of distinguished reputation, that,
      in the age of Cæsar and Tacitus, the inhabitants of the North
      were far more numerous than they are in our days. 38 A more
      serious inquiry into the causes of population seems to have
      convinced modern philosophers of the falsehood, and indeed the
      impossibility, of the supposition. To the names of Mariana and of
      Machiavel, 39 we can oppose the equal names of Robertson and
      Hume. 40


      36 (return) [ The Helvetian nation, which issued from a country
      called Switzerland, contained, of every age and sex, 368,000
      persons, (Cæsar de Bell. Gal. i. 29.) At present, the number of
      people in the Pays de Vaud (a small district on the banks of the
      Leman Lake, much more distinguished for politeness than for
      industry) amounts to 112,591. See an excellent tract of M. Muret,
      in the Memoires de la Societe de Born.]


      37 (return) [ Paul Diaconus, c. 1, 2, 3. Machiavel, Davila, and
      the rest of Paul’s followers, represent these emigrations too
      much as regular and concerted measures.]


      38 (return) [ Sir William Temple and Montesquieu have indulged,
      on this subject, the usual liveliness of their fancy.]


      39 (return) [ Machiavel, Hist. di Firenze, l. i. Mariana, Hist.
      Hispan. l. v. c. 1]


      40 (return) [ Robertson’s Charles V. Hume’s Political Essays.
      Note: It is a wise observation of Malthus, that these nations
      “were not populous in proportion to the land they occupied, but
      to the food they produced.” They were prolific from their pure
      morals and constitutions, but their institutions were not
      calculated to produce food for those whom they brought into
      being.—M—1845.]


      A warlike nation like the Germans, without either cities,
      letters, arts, or money, found some compensation for this savage
      state in the enjoyment of liberty. Their poverty secured their
      freedom, since our desires and our possessions are the strongest
      fetters of despotism. “Among the Suiones (says Tacitus) riches
      are held in honor. They are _therefore_ subject to an absolute
      monarch, who, instead of intrusting his people with the free use
      of arms, as is practised in the rest of Germany, commits them to
      the safe custody, not of a citizen, or even of a freedman, but of
      a slave. The neighbors of the Suiones, the Sitones, are sunk even
      below servitude; they obey a woman.” 41 In the mention of these
      exceptions, the great historian sufficiently acknowledges the
      general theory of government. We are only at a loss to conceive
      by what means riches and despotism could penetrate into a remote
      corner of the North, and extinguish the generous flame that
      blazed with such fierceness on the frontier of the Roman
      provinces, or how the ancestors of those Danes and Norwegians, so
      distinguished in latter ages by their unconquered spirit, could
      thus tamely resign the great character of German liberty. 42 Some
      tribes, however, on the coast of the Baltic, acknowledged the
      authority of kings, though without relinquishing the rights of
      men, 43 but in the far greater part of Germany, the form of
      government was a democracy, tempered, indeed, and controlled, not
      so much by general and positive laws, as by the occasional
      ascendant of birth or valor, of eloquence or superstition. 44


      41 (return) [ Tacit. German. 44, 45. Freinshemius (who dedicated
      his supplement to Livy to Christina of Sweden) thinks proper to
      be very angry with the Roman who expressed so very little
      reverence for Northern queens. Note: The Suiones and the Sitones
      are the ancient inhabitants of Scandinavia, their name may be
      traced in that of Sweden; they did not belong to the race of the
      Suevi, but that of the non-Suevi or Cimbri, whom the Suevi, in
      very remote times, drove back part to the west, part to the
      north; they were afterwards mingled with Suevian tribes, among
      others the Goths, who have traces of their name and power in the
      isle of Gothland.—G]


      42 (return) [May we not suspect that superstition was the parent
      of despotism? The descendants of Odin, (whose race was not
      extinct till the year 1060) are said to have reigned in Sweden
      above a thousand years. The temple of Upsal was the ancient seat
      of religion and empire. In the year 1153 I find a singular law,
      prohibiting the use and profession of arms to any except the
      king’s guards. Is it not probable that it was colored by the
      pretence of reviving an old institution? See Dalin’s History of
      Sweden in the Bibliotheque Raisonneo tom. xl. and xlv.]


      43 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. c. 43.]


      44 (return) [ Id. c. 11, 12, 13, & c.]


      Civil governments, in their first institution, are voluntary
      associations for mutual defence. To obtain the desired end, it is
      absolutely necessary that each individual should conceive himself
      obliged to submit his private opinions and actions to the
      judgment of the greater number of his associates. The German
      tribes were contented with this rude but liberal outline of
      political society. As soon as a youth, born of free parents, had
      attained the age of manhood, he was introduced into the general
      council of his countrymen, solemnly invested with a shield and
      spear, and adopted as an equal and worthy member of the military
      commonwealth. The assembly of the warriors of the tribe was
      convened at stated seasons, or on sudden emergencies. The trial
      of public offences, the election of magistrates, and the great
      business of peace and war, were determined by its independent
      voice. Sometimes indeed, these important questions were
      previously considered and prepared in a more select council of
      the principal chieftains. 45 The magistrates might deliberate and
      persuade, the people only could resolve and execute; and the
      resolutions of the Germans were for the most part hasty and
      violent. Barbarians accustomed to place their freedom in
      gratifying the present passion, and their courage in overlooking
      all future consequences, turned away with indignant contempt from
      the remonstrances of justice and policy, and it was the practice
      to signify by a hollow murmur their dislike of such timid
      counsels. But whenever a more popular orator proposed to
      vindicate the meanest citizen from either foreign or domestic
      injury, whenever he called upon his fellow-countrymen to assert
      the national honor, or to pursue some enterprise full of danger
      and glory, a loud clashing of shields and spears expressed the
      eager applause of the assembly. For the Germans always met in
      arms, and it was constantly to be dreaded, lest an irregular
      multitude, inflamed with faction and strong liquors, should use
      those arms to enforce, as well as to declare, their furious
      resolves. We may recollect how often the diets of Poland have
      been polluted with blood, and the more numerous party has been
      compelled to yield to the more violent and seditious. 46


      45 (return) [ Grotius changes an expression of Tacitus,
      pertractantur into Prætractantur. The correction is equally just
      and ingenious.]


      46 (return) [ Even in our ancient parliament, the barons often
      carried a question, not so much by the number of votes, as by
      that of their armed followers.]


      A general of the tribe was elected on occasions of danger; and,
      if the danger was pressing and extensive, several tribes
      concurred in the choice of the same general. The bravest warrior
      was named to lead his countrymen into the field, by his example
      rather than by his commands. But this power, however limited, was
      still invidious. It expired with the war, and in time of peace
      the German tribes acknowledged not any supreme chief. 47
      _Princes_ were, however, appointed, in the general assembly, to
      administer justice, or rather to compose differences, 48 in their
      respective districts. In the choice of these magistrates, as much
      regard was shown to birth as to merit. 49 To each was assigned,
      by the public, a guard, and a council of a hundred persons, and
      the first of the princes appears to have enjoyed a preeminence of
      rank and honor which sometimes tempted the Romans to compliment
      him with the regal title. 50


      47 (return) [ Cæsar de Bell. Gal. vi. 23.]


      48 (return) [ Minuunt controversias, is a very happy expression
      of Cæsar’s.]


      49 (return) [ Reges ex nobilitate, duces ex virtute sumunt. Tacit
      Germ. 7]


      50 (return) [ Cluver. Germ. Ant. l. i. c. 38.]


      The comparative view of the powers of the magistrates, in two
      remarkable instances, is alone sufficient to represent the whole
      system of German manners. The disposal of the landed property
      within their district was absolutely vested in their hands, and
      they distributed it every year according to a new division. 51 At
      the same time they were not authorized to punish with death, to
      imprison, or even to strike a private citizen. 52 A people thus
      jealous of their persons, and careless of their possessions, must
      have been totally destitute of industry and the arts, but
      animated with a high sense of honor and independence.


      51 (return) [ Cæsar, vi. 22. Tacit Germ. 26.]


      52 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. 7.]


      Chapter IX: State Of Germany Until The Barbarians.—Part III.


      The Germans respected only those duties which they imposed on
      themselves. The most obscure soldier resisted with disdain the
      authority of the magistrates. “The noblest youths blushed not to
      be numbered among the faithful companions of some renowned chief,
      to whom they devoted their arms and service. A noble emulation
      prevailed among the companions to obtain the first place in the
      esteem of their chief; amongst the chiefs, to acquire the
      greatest number of valiant companions. To be ever surrounded by a
      band of select youths was the pride and strength of the chiefs,
      their ornament in peace, their defence in war. The glory of such
      distinguished heroes diffused itself beyond the narrow limits of
      their own tribe. Presents and embassies solicited their
      friendship, and the fame of their arms often insured victory to
      the party which they espoused. In the hour of danger it was
      shameful for the chief to be surpassed in valor by his
      companions; shameful for the companions not to equal the valor of
      their chief. To survive his fall in battle was indelible infamy.
      To protect his person, and to adorn his glory with the trophies
      of their own exploits, were the most sacred of their duties. The
      chiefs combated for victory, the companions for the chief. The
      noblest warriors, whenever their native country was sunk into the
      laziness of peace, maintained their numerous bands in some
      distant scene of action, to exercise their restless spirit, and
      to acquire renown by voluntary dangers. Gifts worthy of
      soldiers—the warlike steed, the bloody and ever victorious
      lance—were the rewards which the companions claimed from the
      liberality of their chief. The rude plenty of his hospitable
      board was the only pay that _he_ could bestow, or _they_ would
      accept. War, rapine, and the free-will offerings of his friends,
      supplied the materials of this munificence.” 53 This institution,
      however it might accidentally weaken the several republics,
      invigorated the general character of the Germans, and even
      ripened amongst them all the virtues of which barbarians are
      susceptible; the faith and valor, the hospitality and the
      courtesy, so conspicuous long afterwards in the ages of chivalry.


      The honorable gifts, bestowed by the chief on his brave
      companions, have been supposed, by an ingenious writer, to
      contain the first rudiments of the fiefs, distributed after the
      conquest of the Roman provinces, by the barbarian lords among
      their vassals, with a similar duty of homage and military
      service. 54 These conditions are, however, very repugnant to the
      maxims of the ancient Germans, who delighted in mutual presents,
      but without either imposing, or accepting, the weight of
      obligations. 55


      53 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. 13, 14.]


      54 (return) [ Esprit des Loix, l. xxx. c. 3. The brilliant
      imagination of Montesquieu is corrected, however, by the dry,
      cold reason of the Abbé de Mably. Observations sur l’Histoire de
      France, tom. i. p. 356.]


      55 (return) [ Gaudent muneribus, sed nec data imputant, nec
      acceptis obligautur. Tacit. Germ. c. 21.]


      “In the days of chivalry, or more properly of romance, all the
      men were brave and all the women were chaste;” and
      notwithstanding the latter of these virtues is acquired and
      preserved with much more difficulty than the former, it is
      ascribed, almost without exception, to the wives of the ancient
      Germans. Polygamy was not in use, except among the princes, and
      among them only for the sake of multiplying their alliances.
      Divorces were prohibited by manners rather than by laws.
      Adulteries were punished as rare and inexpiable crimes; nor was
      seduction justified by example and fashion. 56 We may easily
      discover that Tacitus indulges an honest pleasure in the contrast
      of barbarian virtue with the dissolute conduct of the Roman
      ladies; yet there are some striking circumstances that give an
      air of truth, or at least probability, to the conjugal faith and
      chastity of the Germans.


      56 (return) [ The adulteress was whipped through the village.
      Neither wealth nor beauty could inspire compassion, or procure
      her a second husband. 18, 19.]


      Although the progress of civilization has undoubtedly contributed
      to assuage the fiercer passions of human nature, it seems to have
      been less favorable to the virtue of chastity, whose most
      dangerous enemy is the softness of the mind. The refinements of
      life corrupt while they polish the intercourse of the sexes. The
      gross appetite of love becomes most dangerous when it is
      elevated, or rather, indeed, disguised by sentimental passion.
      The elegance of dress, of motion, and of manners, gives a lustre
      to beauty, and inflames the senses through the imagination.
      Luxurious entertainments, midnight dances, and licentious
      spectacles, present at once temptation and opportunity to female
      frailty. 57 From such dangers the unpolished wives of the
      barbarians were secured by poverty, solitude, and the painful
      cares of a domestic life. The German huts, open, on every side,
      to the eye of indiscretion or jealousy, were a better safeguard
      of conjugal fidelity than the walls, the bolts, and the eunuchs
      of a Persian harem. To this reason another may be added of a more
      honorable nature. The Germans treated their women with esteem and
      confidence, consulted them on every occasion of importance, and
      fondly believed, that in their breasts resided a sanctity and
      wisdom more than human. Some of the interpreters of fate, such as
      Velleda, in the Batavian war, governed, in the name of the deity,
      the fiercest nations of Germany. 58 The rest of the sex, without
      being adored as goddesses, were respected as the free and equal
      companions of soldiers; associated even by the marriage ceremony
      to a life of toil, of danger, and of glory. 59 In their great
      invasions, the camps of the barbarians were filled with a
      multitude of women, who remained firm and undaunted amidst the
      sound of arms, the various forms of destruction, and the
      honorable wounds of their sons and husbands. 60 Fainting armies
      of Germans have, more than once, been driven back upon the enemy
      by the generous despair of the women, who dreaded death much less
      than servitude. If the day was irrecoverably lost, they well knew
      how to deliver themselves and their children, with their own
      hands, from an insulting victor. 61 Heroines of such a cast may
      claim our admiration; but they were most assuredly neither lovely
      nor very susceptible of love. Whilst they affected to emulate the
      stern virtues of _man_, they must have resigned that attractive
      softness in which principally consist the charm and weakness of
      _woman_. Conscious pride taught the German females to suppress
      every tender emotion that stood in competition with honor, and
      the first honor of the sex has ever been that of chastity. The
      sentiments and conduct of these high-spirited matrons may, at
      once, be considered as a cause, as an effect, and as a proof of
      the general character of the nation. Female courage, however it
      may be raised by fanaticism, or confirmed by habit, can be only a
      faint and imperfect imitation of the manly valor that
      distinguishes the age or country in which it may be found.


      57 (return) [ Ovid employs two hundred lines in the research of
      places the most favorable to love. Above all, he considers the
      theatre as the best adapted to collect the beauties of Rome, and
      to melt them into tenderness and sensuality,]


      58 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. iv. 61, 65.]


      59 (return) [ The marriage present was a yoke of oxen, horses,
      and arms. See Germ. c. 18. Tacitus is somewhat too florid on the
      subject.]


      60 (return) [ The change of exigere into exugere is a most
      excellent correction.]


      61 (return) [ Tacit. Germ. c. 7. Plutarch in Mario. Before the
      wives of the Teutones destroyed themselves and their children,
      they had offered to surrender, on condition that they should be
      received as the slaves of the vestal virgins.]


      The religious system of the Germans (if the wild opinions of
      savages can deserve that name) was dictated by their wants, their
      fears, and their ignorance. 62 They adored the great visible
      objects and agents of nature, the Sun and the Moon, the Fire and
      the Earth; together with those imaginary deities, who were
      supposed to preside over the most important occupations of human
      life. They were persuaded, that, by some ridiculous arts of
      divination, they could discover the will of the superior beings,
      and that human sacrifices were the most precious and acceptable
      offering to their altars. Some applause has been hastily bestowed
      on the sublime notion, entertained by that people, of the Deity,
      whom they neither confined within the walls of the temple, nor
      represented by any human figure; but when we recollect, that the
      Germans were unskilled in architecture, and totally unacquainted
      with the art of sculpture, we shall readily assign the true
      reason of a scruple, which arose not so much from a superiority
      of reason, as from a want of ingenuity. The only temples in
      Germany were dark and ancient groves, consecrated by the
      reverence of succeeding generations. Their secret gloom, the
      imagined residence of an invisible power, by presenting no
      distinct object of fear or worship, impressed the mind with a
      still deeper sense of religious horror; 63 and the priests, rude
      and illiterate as they were, had been taught by experience the
      use of every artifice that could preserve and fortify impressions
      so well suited to their own interest.


      62 (return) [ Tacitus has employed a few lines, and Cluverius one
      hundred and twenty-four pages, on this obscure subject. The
      former discovers in Germany the gods of Greece and Rome. The
      latter is positive, that, under the emblems of the sun, the moon,
      and the fire, his pious ancestors worshipped the Trinity in
      unity]


      63 (return) [ The sacred wood, described with such sublime horror
      by Lucan, was in the neighborhood of Marseilles; but there were
      many of the same kind in Germany. * Note: The ancient Germans had
      shapeless idols, and, when they began to build more settled
      habitations, they raised also temples, such as that to the
      goddess Teufana, who presided over divination. See Adelung, Hist.
      of Ane Germans, p 296—G]


      The same ignorance, which renders barbarians incapable of
      conceiving or embracing the useful restraints of laws, exposes
      them naked and unarmed to the blind terrors of superstition. The
      German priests, improving this favorable temper of their
      countrymen, had assumed a jurisdiction even in temporal concerns,
      which the magistrate could not venture to exercise; and the
      haughty warrior patiently submitted to the lash of correction,
      when it was inflicted, not by any human power, but by the
      immediate order of the god of war. 64 The defects of civil policy
      were sometimes supplied by the interposition of ecclesiastical
      authority. The latter was constantly exerted to maintain silence
      and decency in the popular assemblies; and was sometimes extended
      to a more enlarged concern for the national welfare. A solemn
      procession was occasionally celebrated in the present countries
      of Mecklenburgh and Pomerania. The unknown symbol of the _Earth_,
      covered with a thick veil, was placed on a carriage drawn by
      cows; and in this manner the goddess, whose common residence was
      in the Isles of Rugen, visited several adjacent tribes of her
      worshippers. During her progress the sound of war was hushed,
      quarrels were suspended, arms laid aside, and the restless
      Germans had an opportunity of tasting the blessings of peace and
      harmony. 65 The _truce of God_, so often and so ineffectually
      proclaimed by the clergy of the eleventh century, was an obvious
      imitation of this ancient custom. 66


      64 (return) [ Tacit. Germania, c. 7.]


      65 (return) [ Tacit. Germania, c. 40.]


      66 (return) [ See Dr. Robertson’s History of Charles V. vol. i.
      note 10.]


      But the influence of religion was far more powerful to inflame,
      than to moderate, the fierce passions of the Germans. Interest
      and fanaticism often prompted its ministers to sanctify the most
      daring and the most unjust enterprises, by the approbation of
      Heaven, and full assurances of success. The consecrated
      standards, long revered in the groves of superstition, were
      placed in the front of the battle; 67 and the hostile army was
      devoted with dire execrations to the gods of war and of thunder.
      68 In the faith of soldiers (and such were the Germans) cowardice
      is the most unpardonable of sins. A brave man was the worthy
      favorite of their martial deities; the wretch who had lost his
      shield was alike banished from the religious and civil assemblies
      of his countrymen. Some tribes of the north seem to have embraced
      the doctrine of transmigration, 69 others imagined a gross
      paradise of immortal drunkenness. 70 All agreed that a life spent
      in arms, and a glorious death in battle, were the best
      preparations for a happy futurity, either in this or in another
      world.


      67 (return) [ Tacit. Germania, c. 7. These standards were only
      the heads of wild beasts.]


      68 (return) [ See an instance of this custom, Tacit. Annal. xiii.
      57.]


      69 (return) [ Cæsar Diodorus, and Lucan, seem to ascribe this
      doctrine to the Gauls, but M. Pelloutier (Histoire des Celtes, l.
      iii. c. 18) labors to reduce their expressions to a more orthodox
      sense.]


      70 (return) [ Concerning this gross but alluring doctrine of the
      Edda, see Fable xx. in the curious version of that book,
      published by M. Mallet, in his Introduction to the History of
      Denmark.]


      The immortality so vainly promised by the priests, was, in some
      degree, conferred by the bards. That singular order of men has
      most deservedly attracted the notice of all who have attempted to
      investigate the antiquities of the Celts, the Scandinavians, and
      the Germans. Their genius and character, as well as the reverence
      paid to that important office, have been sufficiently
      illustrated. But we cannot so easily express, or even conceive,
      the enthusiasm of arms and glory which they kindled in the breast
      of their audience. Among a polished people a taste for poetry is
      rather an amusement of the fancy than a passion of the soul. And
      yet, when in calm retirement we peruse the combats described by
      Homer or Tasso, we are insensibly seduced by the fiction, and
      feel a momentary glow of martial ardor. But how faint, how cold
      is the sensation which a peaceful mind can receive from solitary
      study! It was in the hour of battle, or in the feast of victory,
      that the bards celebrated the glory of the heroes of ancient
      days, the ancestors of those warlike chieftains, who listened
      with transport to their artless but animated strains. The view of
      arms and of danger heightened the effect of the military song;
      and the passions which it tended to excite, the desire of fame,
      and the contempt of death, were the habitual sentiments of a
      German mind. 71 711


      71 (return) [ See Tacit. Germ. c. 3. Diod. Sicul. l. v. Strabo,
      l. iv. p. 197. The classical reader may remember the rank of
      Demodocus in the Phæacian court, and the ardor infused by Tyrtæus
      into the fainting Spartans. Yet there is little probability that
      the Greeks and the Germans were the same people. Much learned
      trifling might be spared, if our antiquarians would condescend to
      reflect, that similar manners will naturally be produced by
      similar situations.]


      711 (return) [ Besides these battle songs, the Germans sang at
      their festival banquets, (Tac. Ann. i. 65,) and around the bodies
      of their slain heroes. King Theodoric, of the tribe of the Goths,
      killed in a battle against Attila, was honored by songs while he
      was borne from the field of battle. Jornandes, c. 41. The same
      honor was paid to the remains of Attila. Ibid. c. 49. According
      to some historians, the Germans had songs also at their weddings;
      but this appears to me inconsistent with their customs, in which
      marriage was no more than the purchase of a wife. Besides, there
      is but one instance of this, that of the Gothic king, Ataulph,
      who sang himself the nuptial hymn when he espoused Placidia,
      sister of the emperors Arcadius and Honorius, (Olympiodor. p. 8.)
      But this marriage was celebrated according to the Roman rites, of
      which the nuptial songs formed a part. Adelung, p. 382.—G.
      Charlemagne is said to have collected the national songs of the
      ancient Germans. Eginhard, Vit. Car. Mag.—M.]


      Such was the situation, and such were the manners of the ancient
      Germans. Their climate, their want of learning, of arts, and of
      laws, their notions of honor, of gallantry, and of religion,
      their sense of freedom, impatience of peace, and thirst of
      enterprise, all contributed to form a people of military heroes.
      And yet we find, that during more than two hundred and fifty
      years that elapsed from the defeat of Varus to the reign of
      Decius, these formidable barbarians made few considerable
      attempts, and not any material impression on the luxurious, and
      enslaved provinces of the empire. Their progress was checked by
      their want of arms and discipline, and their fury was diverted by
      the intestine divisions of ancient Germany. I. It has been
      observed, with ingenuity, and not without truth, that the command
      of iron soon gives a nation the command of gold. But the rude
      tribes of Germany, alike destitute of both those valuable metals,
      were reduced slowly to acquire, by their unassisted strength, the
      possession of the one as well as the other. The face of a German
      army displayed their poverty of iron. Swords, and the longer kind
      of lances, they could seldom use. Their _frameæ_ (as they called
      them in their own language) were long spears headed with a sharp
      but narrow iron point, and which, as occasion required, they
      either darted from a distance, or pushed in close onset. With
      this spear, and with a shield, their cavalry was contented. A
      multitude of darts, scattered 72 with incredible force, were an
      additional resource of the infantry. Their military dress, when
      they wore any, was nothing more than a loose mantle. A variety of
      colors was the only ornament of their wooden or osier shields.
      Few of the chiefs were distinguished by cuirasses, scarcely any
      by helmets. Though the horses of Germany were neither beautiful,
      swift, nor practised in the skilful evolutions of the Roman
      manege, several of the nations obtained renown by their cavalry;
      but, in general, the principal strength of the Germans consisted
      in their infantry, 73 which was drawn up in several deep columns,
      according to the distinction of tribes and families. Impatient of
      fatigue and delay, these half-armed warriors rushed to battle
      with dissonant shouts and disordered ranks; and sometimes, by the
      effort of native valor, prevailed over the constrained and more
      artificial bravery of the Roman mercenaries. But as the
      barbarians poured forth their whole souls on the first onset,
      they knew not how to rally or to retire. A repulse was a sure
      defeat; and a defeat was most commonly total destruction. When we
      recollect the complete armor of the Roman soldiers, their
      discipline, exercises, evolutions, fortified camps, and military
      engines, it appears a just matter of surprise, how the naked and
      unassisted valor of the barbarians could dare to encounter, in
      the field, the strength of the legions, and the various troops of
      the auxiliaries, which seconded their operations. The contest was
      too unequal, till the introduction of luxury had enervated the
      vigor, and a spirit of disobedience and sedition had relaxed the
      discipline, of the Roman armies. The introduction of barbarian
      auxiliaries into those armies, was a measure attended with very
      obvious dangers, as it might gradually instruct the Germans in
      the arts of war and of policy. Although they were admitted in
      small numbers and with the strictest precaution, the example of
      Civilis was proper to convince the Romans, that the danger was
      not imaginary, and that their precautions were not always
      sufficient. 74 During the civil wars that followed the death of
      Nero, that artful and intrepid Batavian, whom his enemies
      condescended to compare with Hannibal and Sertorius, 75 formed a
      great design of freedom and ambition. Eight Batavian cohorts
      renowned in the wars of Britain and Italy, repaired to his
      standard. He introduced an army of Germans into Gaul, prevailed
      on the powerful cities of Treves and Langres to embrace his
      cause, defeated the legions, destroyed their fortified camps, and
      employed against the Romans the military knowledge which he had
      acquired in their service. When at length, after an obstinate
      struggle, he yielded to the power of the empire, Civilis secured
      himself and his country by an honorable treaty. The Batavians
      still continued to occupy the islands of the Rhine, 76 the
      allies, not the servants, of the Roman monarchy.


      72 (return) [ Missilia spargunt, Tacit. Germ. c. 6. Either that
      historian used a vague expression, or he meant that they were
      thrown at random.]


      73 (return) [ It was their principal distinction from the
      Sarmatians, who generally fought on horseback.]


      74 (return) [ The relation of this enterprise occupies a great
      part of the fourth and fifth books of the History of Tacitus, and
      is more remarkable for its eloquence than perspicuity. Sir Henry
      Saville has observed several inaccuracies.]


      75 (return) [ Tacit. Hist. iv. 13. Like them he had lost an eye.]


      76 (return) [ It was contained between the two branches of the
      old Rhine, as they subsisted before the face of the country was
      changed by art and nature. See Cluver German. Antiq. l. iii. c.
      30, 37.]


      II. The strength of ancient Germany appears formidable, when we
      consider the effects that might have been produced by its united
      effort. The wide extent of country might very possibly contain a
      million of warriors, as all who were of age to bear arms were of
      a temper to use them. But this fierce multitude, incapable of
      concerting or executing any plan of national greatness, was
      agitated by various and often hostile intentions. Germany was
      divided into more than forty independent states; and, even in
      each state, the union of the several tribes was extremely loose
      and precarious. The barbarians were easily provoked; they knew
      not how to forgive an injury, much less an insult; their
      resentments were bloody and implacable. The casual disputes that
      so frequently happened in their tumultuous parties of hunting or
      drinking were sufficient to inflame the minds of whole nations;
      the private feuds of any considerable chieftains diffused itself
      among their followers and allies. To chastise the insolent, or to
      plunder the defenceless, were alike causes of war. The most
      formidable states of Germany affected to encompass their
      territories with a wide frontier of solitude and devastation. The
      awful distance preserved by their neighbors attested the terror
      of their arms, and in some measure defended them from the danger
      of unexpected incursions. 77


      77 (return) [ Cæsar de Bell. Gal. l. vi. 23.]


      “The Bructeri 771 (it is Tacitus who now speaks) were totally
      exterminated by the neighboring tribes, 78 provoked by their
      insolence, allured by the hopes of spoil, and perhaps inspired by
      the tutelar deities of the empire. Above sixty thousand
      barbarians were destroyed; not by the Roman arms, but in our
      sight, and for our entertainment. May the nations, enemies of
      Rome, ever preserve this enmity to each other! We have now
      attained the utmost verge of prosperity, 79 and have nothing left
      to demand of fortune, except the discord of the barbarians.”
      80—These sentiments, less worthy of the humanity than of the
      patriotism of Tacitus, express the invariable maxims of the
      policy of his countrymen. They deemed it a much safer expedient
      to divide than to combat the barbarians, from whose defeat they
      could derive neither honor nor advantage. The money and
      negotiations of Rome insinuated themselves into the heart of
      Germany; and every art of seduction was used with dignity, to
      conciliate those nations whom their proximity to the Rhine or
      Danube might render the most useful friends as well as the most
      troublesome enemies. Chiefs of renown and power were flattered by
      the most trifling presents, which they received either as marks
      of distinction, or as the instruments of luxury. In civil
      dissensions the weaker faction endeavored to strengthen its
      interest by entering into secret connections with the governors
      of the frontier provinces. Every quarrel among the Germans was
      fomented by the intrigues of Rome; and every plan of union and
      public good was defeated by the stronger bias of private jealousy
      and interest. 81


      771 (return) [ The Bructeri were a non-Suevian tribe, who dwelt
      below the duchies of Oldenburgh, and Lauenburgh, on the borders
      of the Lippe, and in the Hartz Mountains. It was among them that
      the priestess Velleda obtained her renown.—G.]


      78 (return) [ They are mentioned, however, in the ivth and vth
      centuries by Nazarius, Ammianus, Claudian, &c., as a tribe of
      Franks. See Cluver. Germ. Antiq. l. iii. c. 13.]


      79 (return) [ Urgentibus is the common reading; but good sense,
      Lipsius, and some Mss. declare for Vergentibus.]


      80 (return) [ Tacit Germania, c. 33. The pious Abbé de la
      Bleterie is very angry with Tacitus, talks of the devil, who was
      a murderer from the beginning, &c., &c.]


      81 (return) [ Many traces of this policy may be discovered in
      Tacitus and Dion: and many more may be inferred from the
      principles of human nature.]


      The general conspiracy which terrified the Romans under the reign
      of Marcus Antoninus, comprehended almost all the nations of
      Germany, and even Sarmatia, from the mouth of the Rhine to that
      of the Danube. 82 It is impossible for us to determine whether
      this hasty confederation was formed by necessity, by reason, or
      by passion; but we may rest assured, that the barbarians were
      neither allured by the indolence, nor provoked by the ambition,
      of the Roman monarch. This dangerous invasion required all the
      firmness and vigilance of Marcus. He fixed generals of ability in
      the several stations of attack, and assumed in person the conduct
      of the most important province on the Upper Danube. After a long
      and doubtful conflict, the spirit of the barbarians was subdued.
      The Quadi and the Marcomanni, 83 who had taken the lead in the
      war, were the most severely punished in its catastrophe. They
      were commanded to retire five miles 84 from their own banks of
      the Danube, and to deliver up the flower of the youth, who were
      immediately sent into Britain, a remote island, where they might
      be secure as hostages, and useful as soldiers. 85 On the frequent
      rebellions of the Quadi and Marcomanni, the irritated emperor
      resolved to reduce their country into the form of a province. His
      designs were disappointed by death. This formidable league,
      however, the only one that appears in the two first centuries of
      the Imperial history, was entirely dissipated, without leaving
      any traces behind in Germany.


      82 (return) [ Hist. Aug. p. 31. Ammian. Marcellin. l. xxxi. c. 5.
      Aurel. Victor. The emperor Marcus was reduced to sell the rich
      furniture of the palace, and to enlist slaves and robbers.]


      83 (return) [ The Marcomanni, a colony, who, from the banks of
      the Rhine occupied Bohemia and Moravia, had once erected a great
      and formidable monarchy under their king Maroboduus. See Strabo,
      l. vii. [p. 290.] Vell. Pat. ii. 108. Tacit. Annal. ii. 63. *
      Note: The Mark-manæn, the March-men or borderers. There seems
      little doubt that this was an appellation, rather than a proper
      name of a part of the great Suevian or Teutonic race.—M.]


      84 (return) [ Mr. Wotton (History of Rome, p. 166) increases the
      prohibition to ten times the distance. His reasoning is specious,
      but not conclusive. Five miles were sufficient for a fortified
      barrier.]


      85 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxi. and lxxii.]


      In the course of this introductory chapter, we have confined
      ourselves to the general outlines of the manners of Germany,
      without attempting to describe or to distinguish the various
      tribes which filled that great country in the time of Cæsar, of
      Tacitus, or of Ptolemy. As the ancient, or as new tribes
      successively present themselves in the series of this history, we
      shall concisely mention their origin, their situation, and their
      particular character. Modern nations are fixed and permanent
      societies, connected among themselves by laws and government,
      bound to their native soil by art and agriculture. The German
      tribes were voluntary and fluctuating associations of soldiers,
      almost of savages. The same territory often changed its
      inhabitants in the tide of conquest and emigration. The same
      communities, uniting in a plan of defence or invasion, bestowed a
      new title on their new confederacy. The dissolution of an ancient
      confederacy restored to the independent tribes their peculiar but
      long-forgotten appellation. A victorious state often communicated
      its own name to a vanquished people. Sometimes crowds of
      volunteers flocked from all parts to the standard of a favorite
      leader; his camp became their country, and some circumstance of
      the enterprise soon gave a common denomination to the mixed
      multitude. The distinctions of the ferocious invaders were
      perpetually varied by themselves, and confounded by the
      astonished subjects of the Roman empire. 86


      86 (return) [ See an excellent dissertation on the origin and
      migrations of nations, in the Memoires de l’Academie des
      Inscriptions, tom. xviii. p. 48—71. It is seldom that the
      antiquarian and the philosopher are so happily blended.]


      Wars, and the administration of public affairs, are the principal
      subjects of history; but the number of persons interested in
      these busy scenes is very different, according to the different
      condition of mankind. In great monarchies, millions of obedient
      subjects pursue their useful occupations in peace and obscurity.
      The attention of the writer, as well as of the reader, is solely
      confined to a court, a capital, a regular army, and the districts
      which happen to be the occasional scene of military operations.
      But a state of freedom and barbarism, the season of civil
      commotions, or the situation of petty republics, 87 raises almost
      every member of the community into action, and consequently into
      notice. The irregular divisions, and the restless motions, of the
      people of Germany, dazzle our imagination, and seem to multiply
      their numbers. The profuse enumeration of kings, of warriors, of
      armies and nations, inclines us to forget that the same objects
      are continually repeated under a variety of appellations, and
      that the most splendid appellations have been frequently lavished
      on the most inconsiderable objects.


      87 (return) [ Should we suspect that Athens contained only 21,000
      citizens, and Sparta no more than 39,000? See Hume and Wallace on
      the number of mankind in ancient and modern times. * Note: This
      number, though too positively stated, is probably not far wrong,
      as an average estimate. On the subject of Athenian population,
      see St. Croix, Acad. des Inscrip. xlviii. Bœckh, Public Economy
      of Athens, i. 47. Eng Trans, Fynes Clinton, Fasti Hellenici, vol.
      i. p. 381. The latter author estimates the citizens of Sparta at
      33,000—M.]


      Chapter X: Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus, Valerian And
      Gallienus—Part I.


The Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus, Valerian, And Gallienus.—The
General Irruption Of The Barbari Ans.—The Thirty Tyrants.


      From the great secular games celebrated by Philip, to the death
      of the emperor Gallienus, there elapsed twenty years of shame and
      misfortune. During that calamitous period, every instant of time
      was marked, every province of the Roman world was afflicted, by
      barbarous invaders, and military tyrants, and the ruined empire
      seemed to approach the last and fatal moment of its dissolution.
      The confusion of the times, and the scarcity of authentic
      memorials, oppose equal difficulties to the historian, who
      attempts to preserve a clear and unbroken thread of narration.
      Surrounded with imperfect fragments, always concise, often
      obscure, and sometimes contradictory, he is reduced to collect,
      to compare, and to conjecture: and though he ought never to place
      his conjectures in the rank of facts, yet the knowledge of human
      nature, and of the sure operation of its fierce and unrestrained
      passions, might, on some occasions, supply the want of historical
      materials.


      There is not, for instance, any difficulty in conceiving, that
      the successive murders of so many emperors had loosened all the
      ties of allegiance between the prince and people; that all the
      generals of Philip were disposed to imitate the example of their
      master; and that the caprice of armies, long since habituated to
      frequent and violent revolutions, might every day raise to the
      throne the most obscure of their fellow-soldiers. History can
      only add, that the rebellion against the emperor Philip broke out
      in the summer of the year two hundred and forty-nine, among the
      legions of Mæsia; and that a subaltern officer, 1 named Marinus,
      was the object of their seditious choice. Philip was alarmed. He
      dreaded lest the treason of the Mæsian army should prove the
      first spark of a general conflagration. Distracted with the
      consciousness of his guilt and of his danger, he communicated the
      intelligence to the senate. A gloomy silence prevailed, the
      effect of fear, and perhaps of disaffection; till at length
      Decius, one of the assembly, assuming a spirit worthy of his
      noble extraction, ventured to discover more intrepidity than the
      emperor seemed to possess. He treated the whole business with
      contempt, as a hasty and inconsiderate tumult, and Philip’s rival
      as a phantom of royalty, who in a very few days would be
      destroyed by the same inconstancy that had created him. The
      speedy completion of the prophecy inspired Philip with a just
      esteem for so able a counsellor; and Decius appeared to him the
      only person capable of restoring peace and discipline to an army
      whose tumultuous spirit did not immediately subside after the
      murder of Marinus. Decius, 2 who long resisted his own
      nomination, seems to have insinuated the danger of presenting a
      leader of merit to the angry and apprehensive minds of the
      soldiers; and his prediction was again confirmed by the event.
      The legions of Mæsia forced their judge to become their
      accomplice. They left him only the alternative of death or the
      purple. His subsequent conduct, after that decisive measure, was
      unavoidable. He conducted, or followed, his army to the confines
      of Italy, whither Philip, collecting all his force to repel the
      formidable competitor whom he had raised up, advanced to meet
      him. The Imperial troops were superior in number; but the rebels
      formed an army of veterans, commanded by an able and experienced
      leader. Philip was either killed in the battle, or put to death a
      few days afterwards at Verona. His son and associate in the
      empire was massacred at Rome by the Prætorian guards; and the
      victorious Decius, with more favorable circumstances than the
      ambition of that age can usually plead, was universally
      acknowledged by the senate and provinces. It is reported, that,
      immediately after his reluctant acceptance of the title of
      Augustus, he had assured Philip, by a private message, of his
      innocence and loyalty, solemnly protesting, that, on his arrival
      on Italy, he would resign the Imperial ornaments, and return to
      the condition of an obedient subject. His professions might be
      sincere; but in the situation where fortune had placed him, it
      was scarcely possible that he could either forgive or be
      forgiven. 3


      1 (return) [ The expression used by Zosimus and Zonaras may
      signify that Marinus commanded a century, a cohort, or a legion.]


      2 (return) [ His birth at Bubalia, a little village in Pannonia,
      (Eutrop. ix. Victor. in Cæsarib. et Epitom.,) seems to
      contradict, unless it was merely accidental, his supposed descent
      from the Decii. Six hundred years had bestowed nobility on the
      Decii: but at the commencement of that period, they were only
      plebeians of merit, and among the first who shared the consulship
      with the haughty patricians. Plebeine Deciorum animæ, &c.
      Juvenal, Sat. viii. 254. See the spirited speech of Decius, in
      Livy. x. 9, 10.]


      3 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 20, c. 22. Zonaras, l. xii. p.
      624, edit. Louvre.]


      The emperor Decius had employed a few months in the works of
      peace and the administration of justice, when he was summoned to
      the banks of the Danube by the invasion of the Goths. This is the
      first considerable occasion in which history mentions that great
      people, who afterwards broke the Roman power, sacked the Capitol,
      and reigned in Gaul, Spain, and Italy. So memorable was the part
      which they acted in the subversion of the Western empire, that
      the name of Goths is frequently but improperly used as a general
      appellation of rude and warlike barbarism.


      In the beginning of the sixth century, and after the conquest of
      Italy, the Goths, in possession of present greatness, very
      naturally indulged themselves in the prospect of past and of
      future glory. They wished to preserve the memory of their
      ancestors, and to transmit to posterity their own achievements.
      The principal minister of the court of Ravenna, the learned
      Cassiodorus, gratified the inclination of the conquerors in a
      Gothic history, which consisted of twelve books, now reduced to
      the imperfect abridgment of Jornandes. 4 These writers passed
      with the most artful conciseness over the misfortunes of the
      nation, celebrated its successful valor, and adorned the triumph
      with many Asiatic trophies, that more properly belonged to the
      people of Scythia. On the faith of ancient songs, the uncertain,
      but the only memorials of barbarians, they deduced the first
      origin of the Goths from the vast island, or peninsula, of
      Scandinavia. 5 501 That extreme country of the North was not
      unknown to the conquerors of Italy: the ties of ancient
      consanguinity had been strengthened by recent offices of
      friendship; and a Scandinavian king had cheerfully abdicated his
      savage greatness, that he might pass the remainder of his days in
      the peaceful and polished court of Ravenna. 6 Many vestiges,
      which cannot be ascribed to the arts of popular vanity, attest
      the ancient residence of the Goths in the countries beyond the
      Rhine. From the time of the geographer Ptolemy, the southern part
      of Sweden seems to have continued in the possession of the less
      enterprising remnant of the nation, and a large territory is even
      at present divided into east and west Gothland. During the middle
      ages, (from the ninth to the twelfth century,) whilst
      Christianity was advancing with a slow progress into the North,
      the Goths and the Swedes composed two distinct and sometimes
      hostile members of the same monarchy. 7 The latter of these two
      names has prevailed without extinguishing the former. The Swedes,
      who might well be satisfied with their own fame in arms, have, in
      every age, claimed the kindred glory of the Goths. In a moment of
      discontent against the court of Rome, Charles the Twelfth
      insinuated, that his victorious troops were not degenerated from
      their brave ancestors, who had already subdued the mistress of
      the world. 8


      4 (return) [ See the prefaces of Cassiodorus and Jornandes; it is
      surprising that the latter should be omitted in the excellent
      edition, published by Grotius, of the Gothic writers.]


      5 (return) [ On the authority of Ablavius, Jornandes quotes some
      old Gothic chronicles in verse. De Reb. Geticis, c. 4.]


      501 (return) [ The Goths have inhabited Scandinavia, but it was
      not their original habitation. This great nation was anciently of
      the Suevian race; it occupied, in the time of Tacitus, and long
      before, Mecklenburgh, Pomerania Southern Prussia and the
      north-west of Poland. A little before the birth of J. C., and in
      the first years of that century, they belonged to the kingdom of
      Marbod, king of the Marcomanni: but Cotwalda, a young Gothic
      prince, delivered them from that tyranny, and established his own
      power over the kingdom of the Marcomanni, already much weakened
      by the victories of Tiberius. The power of the Goths at that time
      must have been great: it was probably from them that the Sinus
      Codanus (the Baltic) took this name, as it was afterwards called
      Mare Suevicum, and Mare Venedicum, during the superiority of the
      proper Suevi and the Venedi. The epoch in which the Goths passed
      into Scandinavia is unknown. See Adelung, Hist. of Anc. Germany,
      p. 200. Gatterer, Hist. Univ. 458.—G. ——M. St. Martin observes,
      that the Scandinavian descent of the Goths rests on the authority
      of Jornandes, who professed to derive it from the traditions of
      the Goths. He is supported by Procopius and Paulus Diaconus. Yet
      the Goths are unquestionably the same with the Getæ of the
      earlier historians. St. Martin, note on Le Beau, Hist. du bas
      Empire, iii. 324. The identity of the Getæ and Goths is by no
      means generally admitted. On the whole, they seem to be one vast
      branch of the Indo-Teutonic race, who spread irregularly towards
      the north of Europe, and at different periods, and in different
      regions, came in contact with the more civilized nations of the
      south. At this period, there seems to have been a reflux of these
      Gothic tribes from the North. Malte Brun considers that there are
      strong grounds for receiving the Islandic traditions commented by
      the Danish Varro, M. Suhm. From these, and the voyage of Pytheas,
      which Malte Brun considers genuine, the Goths were in possession
      of Scandinavia, Ey-Gothland, 250 years before J. C., and of a
      tract on the continent (Reid-Gothland) between the mouths of the
      Vistula and the Oder. In their southern migration, they followed
      the course of the Vistula; afterwards, of the Dnieper. Malte
      Brun, Geogr. i. p. 387, edit. 1832. Geijer, the historian of
      Sweden, ably maintains the Scandinavian origin of the Goths. The
      Gothic language, according to Bopp, is the link between the
      Sanscrit and the modern Teutonic dialects: “I think that I am
      reading Sanscrit when I am reading Olphilas.” Bopp, Conjugations
      System der Sanscrit Sprache, preface, p. x—M.]


      6 (return) [ Jornandes, c. 3.]


      7 (return) [ See in the Prolegomena of Grotius some large
      extracts from Adam of Bremen, and Saxo-Grammaticus. The former
      wrote in the year 1077, the latter flourished about the year
      1200.]


      8 (return) [ Voltaire, Histoire de Charles XII. l. iii. When the
      Austrians desired the aid of the court of Rome against Gustavus
      Adolphus, they always represented that conqueror as the lineal
      successor of Alaric. Harte’s History of Gustavus, vol. ii. p.
      123.]


      Till the end of the eleventh century, a celebrated temple
      subsisted at Upsal, the most considerable town of the Swedes and
      Goths. It was enriched with the gold which the Scandinavians had
      acquired in their piratical adventures, and sanctified by the
      uncouth representations of the three principal deities, the god
      of war, the goddess of generation, and the god of thunder. In the
      general festival, that was solemnized every ninth year, nine
      animals of every species (without excepting the human) were
      sacrificed, and their bleeding bodies suspended in the sacred
      grove adjacent to the temple. 9 The only traces that now subsist
      of this barbaric superstition are contained in the Edda, 901 a
      system of mythology, compiled in Iceland about the thirteenth
      century, and studied by the learned of Denmark and Sweden, as the
      most valuable remains of their ancient traditions.


      9 (return) [ See Adam of Bremen in Grotii Prolegomenis, p. 105.
      The temple of Upsal was destroyed by Ingo, king of Sweden, who
      began his reign in the year 1075, and about fourscore years
      afterwards, a Christian cathedral was erected on its ruins. See
      Dalin’s History of Sweden, in the Bibliotheque Raisonee.]


      901 (return) [ The Eddas have at length been made accessible to
      European scholars by the completion of the publication of the
      Sæmundine Edda by the Arna Magnæan Commission, in 3 vols. 4to.,
      with a copious lexicon of northern mythology.—M.]


      Notwithstanding the mysterious obscurity of the Edda, we can
      easily distinguish two persons confounded under the name of Odin;
      the god of war, and the great legislator of Scandinavia. The
      latter, the Mahomet of the North, instituted a religion adapted
      to the climate and to the people. Numerous tribes on either side
      of the Baltic were subdued by the invincible valor of Odin, by
      his persuasive eloquence, and by the fame which he acquired of a
      most skilful magician. The faith that he had propagated, during a
      long and prosperous life, he confirmed by a voluntary death.
      Apprehensive of the ignominious approach of disease and
      infirmity, he resolved to expire as became a warrior. In a solemn
      assembly of the Swedes and Goths, he wounded himself in nine
      mortal places, hastening away (as he asserted with his dying
      voice) to prepare the feast of heroes in the palace of the God of
      war. 10


      10 (return) [ Mallet, Introduction a l’Histoire du Dannemarc.]


      The native and proper habitation of Odin is distinguished by the
      appellation of As-gard. The happy resemblance of that name with
      As-burg, or As-of, 11 words of a similar signification, has given
      rise to an historical system of so pleasing a contexture, that we
      could almost wish to persuade ourselves of its truth. It is
      supposed that Odin was the chief of a tribe of barbarians which
      dwelt on the banks of the Lake Mæotis, till the fall of
      Mithridates and the arms of Pompey menaced the North with
      servitude. That Odin, yielding with indignant fury to a power he
      was unable to resist, conducted his tribe from the frontiers of
      the Asiatic Sarmatia into Sweden, with the great design of
      forming, in that inaccessible retreat of freedom, a religion and
      a people which, in some remote age, might be subservient to his
      immortal revenge; when his invincible Goths, armed with martial
      fanaticism, should issue in numerous swarms from the neighborhood
      of the Polar circle, to chastise the oppressors of mankind. 12


      11 (return) [ Mallet, c. iv. p. 55, has collected from Strabo,
      Pliny, Ptolemy, and Stephanus Byzantinus, the vestiges of such a
      city and people.]


      12 (return) [ This wonderful expedition of Odin, which, by
      deducting the enmity of the Goths and Romans from so memorable a
      cause, might supply the noble groundwork of an epic poem, cannot
      safely be received as authentic history. According to the obvious
      sense of the Edda, and the interpretation of the most skilful
      critics, As-gard, instead of denoting a real city of the Asiatic
      Sarmatia, is the fictitious appellation of the mystic abode of
      the gods, the Olympus of Scandinavia; from whence the prophet was
      supposed to descend, when he announced his new religion to the
      Gothic nations, who were already seated in the southern parts of
      Sweden. * Note: A curious letter may be consulted on this subject
      from the Swede, Ihre counsellor in the Chancery of Upsal, printed
      at Upsal by Edman, in 1772 and translated into German by M.
      Schlozer. Gottingen, printed for Dietericht, 1779.—G. ——Gibbon,
      at a later period of his work, recanted his opinion of the truth
      of this expedition of Odin. The Asiatic origin of the Goths is
      almost certain from the affinity of their language to the
      Sanscrit and Persian; but their northern writers, when all
      mythology was reduced to hero worship.—M.]


      If so many successive generations of Goths were capable of
      preserving a faint tradition of their Scandinavian origin, we
      must not expect, from such unlettered barbarians, any distinct
      account of the time and circumstances of their emigration. To
      cross the Baltic was an easy and natural attempt. The inhabitants
      of Sweden were masters of a sufficient number of large vessels,
      with oars, 13 and the distance is little more than one hundred
      miles from Carlscroon to the nearest ports of Pomerania and
      Prussia. Here, at length, we land on firm and historic ground. At
      least as early as the Christian æra, 14 and as late as the age of
      the Antonines, 15 the Goths were established towards the mouth of
      the Vistula, and in that fertile province where the commercial
      cities of Thorn, Elbing, Köningsberg, and Dantzick, were long
      afterwards founded. 16 Westward of the Goths, the numerous tribes
      of the Vandals were spread along the banks of the Oder, and the
      sea-coast of Pomerania and Mecklenburgh. A striking resemblance
      of manners, complexion, religion, and language, seemed to
      indicate that the Vandals and the Goths were originally one great
      people. 17 The latter appear to have been subdivided into
      Ostrogoths, Visigoths, and Gepidæ. 18 The distinction among the
      Vandals was more strongly marked by the independent names of
      Heruli, Burgundians, Lombards, and a variety of other petty
      states, many of which, in a future age, expanded themselves into
      powerful monarchies. 181


      13 (return) [ Tacit. Germania, c. 44.]


      14 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. ii. 62. If we could yield a firm
      assent to the navigations of Pytheas of Marseilles, we must allow
      that the Goths had passed the Baltic at least three hundred years
      before Christ.]


      15 (return) [ Ptolemy, l. ii.]


      16 (return) [ By the German colonies who followed the arms of the
      Teutonic knights. The conquest and conversion of Prussia were
      completed by those adventurers in the thirteenth century.]


      17 (return) [ Pliny (Hist. Natur. iv. 14) and Procopius (in Bell.
      Vandal. l. i. c. l) agree in this opinion. They lived in distant
      ages, and possessed different means of investigating the truth.]


      18 (return) [ The Ostro and Visi, the eastern and western Goths,
      obtained those denominations from their original seats in
      Scandinavia. In all their future marches and settlements they
      preserved, with their names, the same relative situation. When
      they first departed from Sweden, the infant colony was contained
      in three vessels. The third, being a heavy sailer, lagged behind,
      and the crew, which afterwards swelled into a nation, received
      from that circumstance the appellation of Gepidæ or Loiterers.
      Jornandes, c. 17. * Note: It was not in Scandinavia that the
      Goths were divided into Ostrogoths and Visigoths; that division
      took place after their irruption into Dacia in the third century:
      those who came from Mecklenburgh and Pomerania were called
      Visigoths; those who came from the south of Prussia, and the
      northwest of Poland, called themselves Ostrogoths. Adelung, Hist.
      All. p. 202 Gatterer, Hist. Univ. 431.—G.]


      181 (return) [ This opinion is by no means probable. The Vandals
      and the Goths equally belonged to the great division of the
      Suevi, but the two tribes were very different. Those who have
      treated on this part of history, appear to me to have neglected
      to remark that the ancients almost always gave the name of the
      dominant and conquering people to all the weaker and conquered
      races. So Pliny calls Vindeli, Vandals, all the people of the
      north-east of Europe, because at that epoch the Vandals were
      doubtless the conquering tribe. Cæsar, on the contrary, ranges
      under the name of Suevi, many of the tribes whom Pliny reckons as
      Vandals, because the Suevi, properly so called, were then the
      most powerful tribe in Germany. When the Goths, become in their
      turn conquerors, had subjugated the nations whom they encountered
      on their way, these nations lost their name with their liberty,
      and became of Gothic origin. The Vandals themselves were then
      considered as Goths; the Heruli, the Gepidæ, &c., suffered the
      same fate. A common origin was thus attributed to tribes who had
      only been united by the conquests of some dominant nation, and
      this confusion has given rise to a number of historical
      errors.—G. ——M. St. Martin has a learned note (to Le Beau, v.
      261) on the origin of the Vandals. The difficulty appears to be
      in rejecting the close analogy of the name with the Vend or
      Wendish race, who were of Sclavonian, not of Suevian or German,
      origin. M. St. Martin supposes that the different races spread
      from the head of the Adriatic to the Baltic, and even the Veneti,
      on the shores of the Adriatic, the Vindelici, the tribes which
      gave their name to Vindobena, Vindoduna, Vindonissa, were
      branches of the same stock with the Sclavonian Venedi, who at one
      time gave their name to the Baltic; that they all spoke dialects
      of the Wendish language, which still prevails in Carinthia,
      Carniola, part of Bohemia, and Lusatia, and is hardly extinct in
      Mecklenburgh and Pomerania. The Vandal race, once so fearfully
      celebrated in the annals of mankind, has so utterly perished from
      the face of the earth, that we are not aware that any vestiges of
      their language can be traced, so as to throw light on the
      disputed question of their German, their Sclavonian, or
      independent origin. The weight of ancient authority seems against
      M. St. Martin’s opinion. Compare, on the Vandals, Malte Brun.
      394. Also Gibbon’s note, c. xli. n. 38.—M.]


      In the age of the Antonines, the Goths were still seated in
      Prussia. About the reign of Alexander Severus, the Roman province
      of Dacia had already experienced their proximity by frequent and
      destructive inroads. 19 In this interval, therefore, of about
      seventy years we must place the second migration of the Goths
      from the Baltic to the Euxine; but the cause that produced it
      lies concealed among the various motives which actuate the
      conduct of unsettled barbarians. Either a pestilence or a famine,
      a victory or a defeat, an oracle of the gods or the eloquence of
      a daring leader, were sufficient to impel the Gothic arms on the
      milder climates of the south. Besides the influence of a martial
      religion, the numbers and spirit of the Goths were equal to the
      most dangerous adventures. The use of round bucklers and short
      swords rendered them formidable in a close engagement; the manly
      obedience which they yielded to hereditary kings, gave uncommon
      union and stability to their councils; 20 and the renowned Amala,
      the hero of that age, and the tenth ancestor of Theodoric, king
      of Italy, enforced, by the ascendant of personal merit, the
      prerogative of his birth, which he derived from the _Anses_, or
      demigods of the Gothic nation. 21


      19 (return) [ See a fragment of Peter Patricius in the Excerpta
      Legationum and with regard to its probable date, see Tillemont,
      Hist, des Empereurs, tom. iii. p. 346.]


      20 (return) [ Omnium harum gentium insigne, rotunda scuta, breves
      gladii, et erga rages obsequium. Tacit. Germania, c. 43. The
      Goths probably acquired their iron by the commerce of amber.]


      21 (return) [ Jornandes, c. 13, 14.]


      The fame of a great enterprise excited the bravest warriors from
      all the Vandalic states of Germany, many of whom are seen a few
      years afterwards combating under the common standard of the
      Goths. 22 The first motions of the emigrants carried them to the
      banks of the Prypec, a river universally conceived by the
      ancients to be the southern branch of the Borysthenes. 23 The
      windings of that great stream through the plains of Poland and
      Russia gave a direction to their line of march, and a constant
      supply of fresh water and pasturage to their numerous herds of
      cattle. They followed the unknown course of the river, confident
      in their valor, and careless of whatever power might oppose their
      progress. The Bastarnæ and the Venedi were the first who
      presented themselves; and the flower of their youth, either from
      choice or compulsion, increased the Gothic army. The Bastarnæ
      dwelt on the northern side of the Carpathian Mountains: the
      immense tract of land that separated the Bastarnæ from the
      savages of Finland was possessed, or rather wasted, by the
      Venedi; 24 we have some reason to believe that the first of these
      nations, which distinguished itself in the Macedonian war, 25 and
      was afterwards divided into the formidable tribes of the Peucini,
      the Borani, the Carpi, &c., derived its origin from the Germans.
      251 With better authority, a Sarmatian extraction may be assigned
      to the Venedi, who rendered themselves so famous in the middle
      ages. 26 But the confusion of blood and manners on that doubtful
      frontier often perplexed the most accurate observers. 27 As the
      Goths advanced near the Euxine Sea, they encountered a purer race
      of Sarmatians, the Jazyges, the Alani, 271 and the Roxolani; and
      they were probably the first Germans who saw the mouths of the
      Borysthenes, and of the Tanais. If we inquire into the
      characteristic marks of the people of Germany and of Sarmatia, we
      shall discover that those two great portions of human kind were
      principally distinguished by fixed huts or movable tents, by a
      close dress or flowing garments, by the marriage of one or of
      several wives, by a military force, consisting, for the most
      part, either of infantry or cavalry; and above all, by the use of
      the Teutonic, or of the Sclavonian language; the last of which
      has been diffused by conquest, from the confines of Italy to the
      neighborhood of Japan.


      22 (return) [ The Heruli, and the Uregundi or Burgundi, are
      particularly mentioned. See Mascou’s History of the Germans, l.
      v. A passage in the Augustan History, p. 28, seems to allude to
      this great emigration. The Marcomannic war was partly occasioned
      by the pressure of barbarous tribes, who fled before the arms of
      more northern barbarians.]


      23 (return) [ D’Anville, Geographie Ancienne, and the third part
      of his incomparable map of Europe.]


      24 (return) [ Tacit. Germania, c. 46.]


      25 (return) [ Cluver. Germ. Antiqua, l. iii. c. 43.]


      251 (return) [ The Bastarnæ cannot be considered original
      inhabitants of Germany Strabo and Tacitus appear to doubt it;
      Pliny alone calls them Germans: Ptolemy and Dion treat them as
      Scythians, a vague appellation at this period of history; Livy,
      Plutarch, and Diodorus Siculus, call them Gauls, and this is the
      most probable opinion. They descended from the Gauls who entered
      Germany under Signoesus. They are always found associated with
      other Gaulish tribes, such as the Boll, the Taurisci, &c., and
      not to the German tribes. The names of their chiefs or princes,
      Chlonix, Chlondicus. Deldon, are not German names. Those who were
      settled in the island of Peuce in the Danube, took the name of
      Peucini. The Carpi appear in 237 as a Suevian tribe who had made
      an irruption into Mæsia. Afterwards they reappear under the
      Ostrogoths, with whom they were probably blended. Adelung, p.
      236, 278.—G.]


      26 (return) [ The Venedi, the Slavi, and the Antes, were the
      three great tribes of the same people. Jornandes, 24. * Note
      Dagger: They formed the great Sclavonian nation.—G.]


      27 (return) [ Tacitus most assuredly deserves that title, and
      even his cautious suspense is a proof of his diligent inquiries.]


      271 (return) [ Jac. Reineggs supposed that he had found, in the
      mountains of Caucasus, some descendants of the Alani. The Tartars
      call them Edeki-Alan: they speak a peculiar dialect of the
      ancient language of the Tartars of Caucasus. See J. Reineggs’
      Descr. of Caucasus, p. 11, 13.—G. According to Klaproth, they are
      the Ossetes of the present day in Mount Caucasus and were the
      same with the Albanians of antiquity. Klaproth, Hist. de l’Asie,
      p. 180.—M.]


      Chapter X: Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus, Valerian And
      Gallienus.—Part II.


      The Goths were now in possession of the Ukraine, a country of
      considerable extent and uncommon fertility, intersected with
      navigable rivers, which, from either side, discharge themselves
      into the Borysthenes; and interspersed with large and lofty
      forests of oaks. The plenty of game and fish, the innumerable
      bee-hives deposited in the hollow of old trees, and in the
      cavities of rocks, and forming, even in that rude age, a valuable
      branch of commerce, the size of the cattle, the temperature of
      the air, the aptness of the soil for every species of grain, and
      the luxuriancy of the vegetation, all displayed the liberality of
      Nature, and tempted the industry of man. 28 But the Goths
      withstood all these temptations, and still adhered to a life of
      idleness, of poverty, and of rapine.


      28 (return) [ Genealogical History of the Tartars, p. 593. Mr.
      Bell (vol. ii. p 379) traversed the Ukraine, in his journey from
      Petersburgh to Constantinople. The modern face of the country is
      a just representation of the ancient, since, in the hands of the
      Cossacks, it still remains in a state of nature.]


      The Scythian hordes, which, towards the east, bordered on the new
      settlements of the Goths, presented nothing to their arms, except
      the doubtful chance of an unprofitable victory. But the prospect
      of the Roman territories was far more alluring; and the fields of
      Dacia were covered with rich harvests, sown by the hands of an
      industrious, and exposed to be gathered by those of a warlike,
      people. It is probable that the conquests of Trajan, maintained
      by his successors, less for any real advantage than for ideal
      dignity, had contributed to weaken the empire on that side. The
      new and unsettled province of Dacia was neither strong enough to
      resist, nor rich enough to satiate, the rapaciousness of the
      barbarians. As long as the remote banks of the Niester were
      considered as the boundary of the Roman power, the fortifications
      of the Lower Danube were more carelessly guarded, and the
      inhabitants of Mæsia lived in supine security, fondly conceiving
      themselves at an inaccessible distance from any barbarian
      invaders. The irruptions of the Goths, under the reign of Philip,
      fatally convinced them of their mistake. The king, or leader, of
      that fierce nation, traversed with contempt the province of
      Dacia, and passed both the Niester and the Danube without
      encountering any opposition capable of retarding his progress.
      The relaxed discipline of the Roman troops betrayed the most
      important posts, where they were stationed, and the fear of
      deserved punishment induced great numbers of them to enlist under
      the Gothic standard. The various multitude of barbarians
      appeared, at length, under the walls of Marcianopolis, a city
      built by Trajan in honor of his sister, and at that time the
      capital of the second Mæsia. 29 The inhabitants consented to
      ransom their lives and property by the payment of a large sum of
      money, and the invaders retreated back into their deserts,
      animated, rather than satisfied, with the first success of their
      arms against an opulent but feeble country. Intelligence was soon
      transmitted to the emperor Decius, that Cniva, king of the Goths,
      had passed the Danube a second time, with more considerable
      forces; that his numerous detachments scattered devastation over
      the province of Mæsia, whilst the main body of the army,
      consisting of seventy thousand Germans and Sarmatians, a force
      equal to the most daring achievements, required the presence of
      the Roman monarch, and the exertion of his military power.


      29 (return) [ In the sixteenth chapter of Jornandes, instead of
      secundo Mæsiam we may venture to substitute secundam, the second
      Mæsia, of which Marcianopolis was certainly the capital. (See
      Hierocles de Provinciis, and Wesseling ad locum, p. 636.
      Itinerar.) It is surprising how this palpable error of the scribe
      should escape the judicious correction of Grotius. Note: Luden
      has observed that Jornandes mentions two passages over the
      Danube; this relates to the second irruption into Mæsia.
      Geschichte des T V. ii. p. 448.—M.]


      Decius found the Goths engaged before Nicopolis, one of the many
      monuments of Trajan’s victories. 30 On his approach they raised
      the siege, but with a design only of marching away to a conquest
      of greater importance, the siege of Philippopolis, a city of
      Thrace, founded by the father of Alexander, near the foot of
      Mount Hæmus. 31 Decius followed them through a difficult country,
      and by forced marches; but when he imagined himself at a
      considerable distance from the rear of the Goths, Cniva turned
      with rapid fury on his pursuers. The camp of the Romans was
      surprised and pillaged, and, for the first time, their emperor
      fled in disorder before a troop of half-armed barbarians. After a
      long resistance, Philoppopolis, destitute of succor, was taken by
      storm. A hundred thousand persons are reported to have been
      massacred in the sack of that great city. 32 Many prisoners of
      consequence became a valuable accession to the spoil; and
      Priscus, a brother of the late emperor Philip, blushed not to
      assume the purple, under the protection of the barbarous enemies
      of Rome. 33 The time, however, consumed in that tedious siege,
      enabled Decius to revive the courage, restore the discipline, and
      recruit the numbers of his troops. He intercepted several parties
      of Carpi, and other Germans, who were hastening to share the
      victory of their countrymen, 34 intrusted the passes of the
      mountains to officers of approved valor and fidelity, 35 repaired
      and strengthened the fortifications of the Danube, and exerted
      his utmost vigilance to oppose either the progress or the retreat
      of the Goths. Encouraged by the return of fortune, he anxiously
      waited for an opportunity to retrieve, by a great and decisive
      blow, his own glory, and that of the Roman arms. 36


      30 (return) [ The place is still called Nicop. D’Anville,
      Geographie Ancienne, tom. i. p. 307. The little stream, on whose
      banks it stood, falls into the Danube.]


      31 (return) [ Stephan. Byzant. de Urbibus, p. 740. Wesseling,
      Itinerar. p. 136. Zonaras, by an odd mistake, ascribes the
      foundation of Philippopolis to the immediate predecessor of
      Decius. * Note: Now Philippopolis or Philiba; its situation among
      the hills caused it to be also called Trimontium. D’Anville,
      Geog. Anc. i. 295.—G.]


      32 (return) [ Ammian. xxxi. 5.]


      33 (return) [ Aurel. Victor. c. 29.]


      34 (return) [ Victoriæ Carpicæ, on some medals of Decius,
      insinuate these advantages.]


      35 (return) [ Claudius (who afterwards reigned with so much
      glory) was posted in the pass of Thermopylæ with 200 Dardanians,
      100 heavy and 160 light horse, 60 Cretan archers, and 1000
      well-armed recruits. See an original letter from the emperor to
      his officer, in the Augustan History, p. 200.]


      36 (return) [ Jornandes, c. 16—18. Zosimus, l. i. p. 22. In the
      general account of this war, it is easy to discover the opposite
      prejudices of the Gothic and the Grecian writer. In carelessness
      alone they are alike.]


      At the same time when Decius was struggling with the violence of
      the tempest, his mind, calm and deliberate amidst the tumult of
      war, investigated the more general causes that, since the age of
      the Antonines, had so impetuously urged the decline of the Roman
      greatness. He soon discovered that it was impossible to replace
      that greatness on a permanent basis without restoring public
      virtue, ancient principles and manners, and the oppressed majesty
      of the laws. To execute this noble but arduous design, he first
      resolved to revive the obsolete office of censor; an office
      which, as long as it had subsisted in its pristine integrity, had
      so much contributed to the perpetuity of the state, 37 till it
      was usurped and gradually neglected by the Cæsars. 38 Conscious
      that the favor of the sovereign may confer power, but that the
      esteem of the people can alone bestow authority, he submitted the
      choice of the censor to the unbiased voice of the senate. By
      their unanimous votes, or rather acclamations, Valerian, who was
      afterwards emperor, and who then served with distinction in the
      army of Decius, was declared the most worthy of that exalted
      honor. As soon as the decree of the senate was transmitted to the
      emperor, he assembled a great council in his camp, and before the
      investiture of the censor elect, he apprised him of the
      difficulty and importance of his great office. “Happy Valerian,”
      said the prince to his distinguished subject, “happy in the
      general approbation of the senate and of the Roman republic!
      Accept the censorship of mankind; and judge of our manners. You
      will select those who deserve to continue members of the senate;
      you will restore the equestrian order to its ancient splendor;
      you will improve the revenue, yet moderate the public burdens.
      You will distinguish into regular classes the various and
      infinite multitude of citizens, and accurately view the military
      strength, the wealth, the virtue, and the resources of Rome. Your
      decisions shall obtain the force of laws. The army, the palace,
      the ministers of justice, and the great officers of the empire,
      are all subject to your tribunal. None are exempted, excepting
      only the ordinary consuls, 39 the præfect of the city, the king
      of the sacrifices, and (as long as she preserves her chastity
      inviolate) the eldest of the vestal virgins. Even these few, who
      may not dread the severity, will anxiously solicit the esteem, of
      the Roman censor.” 40


      37 (return) [ Montesquieu, Grandeur et Decadence des Romains, c.
      viii. He illustrates the nature and use of the censorship with
      his usual ingenuity, and with uncommon precision.]


      38 (return) [ Vespasian and Titus were the last censors, (Pliny,
      Hist. Natur vii. 49. Censorinus de Die Natali.) The modesty of
      Trajan refused an honor which he deserved, and his example became
      a law to the Antonines. See Pliny’s Panegyric, c. 45 and 60.]


      39 (return) [ Yet in spite of his exemption, Pompey appeared
      before that tribunal during his consulship. The occasion, indeed,
      was equally singular and honorable. Plutarch in Pomp. p. 630.]


      40 (return) [ See the original speech in the Augustan Hist. p.
      173-174.]


      A magistrate, invested with such extensive powers, would have
      appeared not so much the minister, as the colleague of his
      sovereign. 41 Valerian justly dreaded an elevation so full of
      envy and of suspicion. He modestly argued the alarming greatness
      of the trust, his own insufficiency, and the incurable corruption
      of the times. He artfully insinuated, that the office of censor
      was inseparable from the Imperial dignity, and that the feeble
      hands of a subject were unequal to the support of such an immense
      weight of cares and of power. 42 The approaching event of war
      soon put an end to the prosecution of a project so specious, but
      so impracticable; and whilst it preserved Valerian from the
      danger, saved the emperor Decius from the disappointment, which
      would most probably have attended it. A censor may maintain, he
      can never restore, the morals of a state. It is impossible for
      such a magistrate to exert his authority with benefit, or even
      with effect, unless he is supported by a quick sense of honor and
      virtue in the minds of the people, by a decent reverence for the
      public opinion, and by a train of useful prejudices combating on
      the side of national manners. In a period when these principles
      are annihilated, the censorial jurisdiction must either sink into
      empty pageantry, or be converted into a partial instrument of
      vexatious oppression. 43 It was easier to vanquish the Goths than
      to eradicate the public vices; yet even in the first of these
      enterprises, Decius lost his army and his life.


      41 (return) [ This transaction might deceive Zonaras, who
      supposes that Valerian was actually declared the colleague of
      Decius, l. xii. p. 625.]


      42 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 174. The emperor’s reply is
      omitted.]


      43 (return) [ Such as the attempts of Augustus towards a
      reformation of manness. Tacit. Annal. iii. 24.]


      The Goths were now, on every side, surrounded and pursued by the
      Roman arms. The flower of their troops had perished in the long
      siege of Philippopolis, and the exhausted country could no longer
      afford subsistence for the remaining multitude of licentious
      barbarians. Reduced to this extremity, the Goths would gladly
      have purchased, by the surrender of all their booty and
      prisoners, the permission of an undisturbed retreat. But the
      emperor, confident of victory, and resolving, by the chastisement
      of these invaders, to strike a salutary terror into the nations
      of the North, refused to listen to any terms of accommodation.
      The high-spirited barbarians preferred death to slavery. An
      obscure town of Mæsia, called Forum Terebronii, 44 was the scene
      of the battle. The Gothic army was drawn up in three lines, and
      either from choice or accident, the front of the third line was
      covered by a morass. In the beginning of the action, the son of
      Decius, a youth of the fairest hopes, and already associated to
      the honors of the purple, was slain by an arrow, in the sight of
      his afflicted father; who, summoning all his fortitude,
      admonished the dismayed troops, that the loss of a single soldier
      was of little importance to the republic. 45 The conflict was
      terrible; it was the combat of despair against grief and rage.
      The first line of the Goths at length gave way in disorder; the
      second, advancing to sustain it, shared its fate; and the third
      only remained entire, prepared to dispute the passage of the
      morass, which was imprudently attempted by the presumption of the
      enemy. “Here the fortune of the day turned, and all things became
      adverse to the Romans; the place deep with ooze, sinking under
      those who stood, slippery to such as advanced; their armor heavy,
      the waters deep; nor could they wield, in that uneasy situation,
      their weighty javelins. The barbarians, on the contrary, were
      inured to encounter in the bogs, their persons tall, their spears
      long, such as could wound at a distance.” 46 In this morass the
      Roman army, after an ineffectual struggle, was irrecoverably
      lost; nor could the body of the emperor ever be found. 47 Such
      was the fate of Decius, in the fiftieth year of his age; an
      accomplished prince, active in war and affable in peace; 48 who,
      together with his son, has deserved to be compared, both in life
      and death, with the brightest examples of ancient virtue. 49


      44 (return) [ Tillemont, Histoire des Empereurs, tom. iii. p.
      598. As Zosimus and some of his followers mistake the Danube for
      the Tanais, they place the field of battle in the plains of
      Scythia.]


      45 (return) [ Aurelius Victor allows two distinct actions for the
      deaths of the two Decii; but I have preferred the account of
      Jornandes.]


      46 (return) [ I have ventured to copy from Tacitus (Annal. i. 64)
      the picture of a similar engagement between a Roman army and a
      German tribe.]


      47 (return) [ Jornandes, c. 18. Zosimus, l. i. p. 22, [c. 23.]
      Zonaras, l. xii. p. 627. Aurelius Victor.]


      48 (return) [ The Decii were killed before the end of the year
      two hundred and fifty-one, since the new princes took possession
      of the consulship on the ensuing calends of January.]


      49 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 223, gives them a very honorable
      place among the small number of good emperors who reigned between
      Augustus and Diocletian.]


      This fatal blow humbled, for a very little time, the insolence of
      the legions. They appeared to have patiently expected, and
      submissively obeyed, the decree of the senate which regulated the
      succession to the throne. From a just regard for the memory of
      Decius, the Imperial title was conferred on Hostilianus, his only
      surviving son; but an equal rank, with more effectual power, was
      granted to Gallus, whose experience and ability seemed equal to
      the great trust of guardian to the young prince and the
      distressed empire. 50 The first care of the new emperor was to
      deliver the Illyrian provinces from the intolerable weight of the
      victorious Goths. He consented to leave in their hands the rich
      fruits of their invasion, an immense booty, and what was still
      more disgraceful, a great number of prisoners of the highest
      merit and quality. He plentifully supplied their camp with every
      conveniency that could assuage their angry spirits or facilitate
      their so much wished-for departure; and he even promised to pay
      them annually a large sum of gold, on condition they should never
      afterwards infest the Roman territories by their incursions. 51


      50 (return) [ Hæc ubi Patres comperere.. .. decernunt. Victor in
      Cæsaribus.]


      51 (return) [ Zonaras, l. xii. p. 628.]


      In the age of the Scipios, the most opulent kings of the earth,
      who courted the protection of the victorious commonwealth, were
      gratified with such trifling presents as could only derive a
      value from the hand that bestowed them; an ivory chair, a coarse
      garment of purple, an inconsiderable piece of plate, or a
      quantity of copper coin. 52 After the wealth of nations had
      centred in Rome, the emperors displayed their greatness, and even
      their policy, by the regular exercise of a steady and moderate
      liberality towards the allies of the state. They relieved the
      poverty of the barbarians, honored their merit, and recompensed
      their fidelity. These voluntary marks of bounty were understood
      to flow, not from the fears, but merely from the generosity or
      the gratitude of the Romans; and whilst presents and subsidies
      were liberally distributed among friends and suppliants, they
      were sternly refused to such as claimed them as a debt. 53 But
      this stipulation, of an annual payment to a victorious enemy,
      appeared without disguise in the light of an ignominious tribute;
      the minds of the Romans were not yet accustomed to accept such
      unequal laws from a tribe of barbarians; and the prince, who by a
      necessary concession had probably saved his country, became the
      object of the general contempt and aversion. The death of
      Hostiliamus, though it happened in the midst of a raging
      pestilence, was interpreted as the personal crime of Gallus; 54
      and even the defeat of the later emperor was ascribed by the
      voice of suspicion to the perfidious counsels of his hated
      successor. 55 The tranquillity which the empire enjoyed during
      the first year of his administration, 56 served rather to inflame
      than to appease the public discontent; and as soon as the
      apprehensions of war were removed, the infamy of the peace was
      more deeply and more sensibly felt.


      52 (return) [ A _Sella_, a _Toga_, and a golden _Patera_ of five
      pounds weight, were accepted with joy and gratitude by the
      wealthy king of Egypt. (Livy, xxvii. 4.) _Quina millia Æris_, a
      weight of copper, in value about eighteen pounds sterling, was
      the usual present made to foreign are ambassadors. (Livy, xxxi.
      9.)]


      53 (return) [ See the firmness of a Roman general so late as the
      time of Alexander Severus, in the Excerpta Legationum, p. 25,
      edit. Louvre.]


      54 (return) [ For the plague, see Jornandes, c. 19, and Victor in
      Cæsaribus.]


      55 (return) [ These improbable accusations are alleged by
      Zosimus, l. i. p. 28, 24.]


      56 (return) [ Jornandes, c. 19. The Gothic writer at least
      observed the peace which his victorious countrymen had sworn to
      Gallus.]


      But the Romans were irritated to a still higher degree, when they
      discovered that they had not even secured their repose, though at
      the expense of their honor. The dangerous secret of the wealth
      and weakness of the empire had been revealed to the world. New
      swarms of barbarians, encouraged by the success, and not
      conceiving themselves bound by the obligation of their brethren,
      spread devastation though the Illyrian provinces, and terror as
      far as the gates of Rome. The defence of the monarchy, which
      seemed abandoned by the pusillanimous emperor, was assumed by
      Æmilianus, governor of Pannonia and Mæsia; who rallied the
      scattered forces, and revived the fainting spirits of the troops.
      The barbarians were unexpectedly attacked, routed, chased, and
      pursued beyond the Danube. The victorious leader distributed as a
      donative the money collected for the tribute, and the
      acclamations of the soldiers proclaimed him emperor on the field
      of battle. 57 Gallus, who, careless of the general welfare,
      indulged himself in the pleasures of Italy, was almost in the
      same instant informed of the success, of the revolt, and of the
      rapid approach of his aspiring lieutenant. He advanced to meet
      him as far as the plains of Spoleto. When the armies came in
      sight of each other, the soldiers of Gallus compared the
      ignominious conduct of their sovereign with the glory of his
      rival. They admired the valor of Æmilianus; they were attracted
      by his liberality, for he offered a considerable increase of pay
      to all deserters. 58 The murder of Gallus, and of his son
      Volusianus, put an end to the civil war; and the senate gave a
      legal sanction to the rights of conquest. The letters of
      Æmilianus to that assembly displayed a mixture of moderation and
      vanity. He assured them, that he should resign to their wisdom
      the civil administration; and, contenting himself with the
      quality of their general, would in a short time assert the glory
      of Rome, and deliver the empire from all the barbarians both of
      the North and of the East. 59 His pride was flattered by the
      applause of the senate; and medals are still extant, representing
      him with the name and attributes of Hercules the Victor, and Mars
      the Avenger. 60


      57 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 25, 26.]


      58 (return) [ Victor in Cæsaribus.]


      59 (return) [ Zonaras, l. xii. p. 628.]


      60 (return) [ Banduri Numismata, p. 94.]


      If the new monarch possessed the abilities, he wanted the time,
      necessary to fulfil these splendid promises. Less than four
      months intervened between his victory and his fall. 61 He had
      vanquished Gallus: he sunk under the weight of a competitor more
      formidable than Gallus. That unfortunate prince had sent
      Valerian, already distinguished by the honorable title of censor,
      to bring the legions of Gaul and Germany 62 to his aid. Valerian
      executed that commission with zeal and fidelity; and as he
      arrived too late to save his sovereign, he resolved to revenge
      him. The troops of Æmilianus, who still lay encamped in the
      plains of Spoleto, were awed by the sanctity of his character,
      but much more by the superior strength of his army; and as they
      were now become as incapable of personal attachment as they had
      always been of constitutional principle, they readily imbrued
      their hands in the blood of a prince who so lately had been the
      object of their partial choice. The guilt was theirs, 621 but the
      advantage of it was Valerian’s; who obtained the possession of
      the throne by the means indeed of a civil war, but with a degree
      of innocence singular in that age of revolutions; since he owed
      neither gratitude nor allegiance to his predecessor, whom he
      dethroned.


      61 (return) [ Eutropius, l. ix. c. 6, says tertio mense. Eusebio
      this emperor.]


      62 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 28. Eutropius and Victor station
      Valerian’s army in Rhætia.]


      621 (return) [ Aurelius Victor says that Æmilianus died of a
      natural disorder. Tropius, in speaking of his death, does not say
      that he was assassinated—G.]


      Valerian was about sixty years of age 63 when he was invested
      with the purple, not by the caprice of the populace, or the
      clamors of the army, but by the unanimous voice of the Roman
      world. In his gradual ascent through the honors of the state, he
      had deserved the favor of virtuous princes, and had declared
      himself the enemy of tyrants. 64 His noble birth, his mild but
      unblemished manners, his learning, prudence, and experience, were
      revered by the senate and people; and if mankind (according to
      the observation of an ancient writer) had been left at liberty to
      choose a master, their choice would most assuredly have fallen on
      Valerian. 65 Perhaps the merit of this emperor was inadequate to
      his reputation; perhaps his abilities, or at least his spirit,
      were affected by the languor and coldness of old age. The
      consciousness of his decline engaged him to share the throne with
      a younger and more active associate; 66 the emergency of the
      times demanded a general no less than a prince; and the
      experience of the Roman censor might have directed him where to
      bestow the Imperial purple, as the reward of military merit. But
      instead of making a judicious choice, which would have confirmed
      his reign and endeared his memory, Valerian, consulting only the
      dictates of affection or vanity, immediately invested with the
      supreme honors his son Gallienus, a youth whose effeminate vices
      had been hitherto concealed by the obscurity of a private
      station. The joint government of the father and the son subsisted
      about seven, and the sole administration of Gallienus continued
      about eight, years. But the whole period was one uninterrupted
      series of confusion and calamity. As the Roman empire was at the
      same time, and on every side, attacked by the blind fury of
      foreign invaders, and the wild ambition of domestic usurpers, we
      shall consult order and perspicuity, by pursuing, not so much the
      doubtful arrangement of dates, as the more natural distribution
      of subjects. The most dangerous enemies of Rome, during the
      reigns of Valerian and Gallienus, were, 1. The Franks; 2. The
      Alemanni; 3. The Goths; and, 4. The Persians. Under these general
      appellations, we may comprehend the adventures of less
      considerable tribes, whose obscure and uncouth names would only
      serve to oppress the memory and perplex the attention of the
      reader.


      63 (return) [ He was about seventy at the time of his accession,
      or, as it is more probable, of his death. Hist. August. p. 173.
      Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iii. p. 893, note 1.]


      64 (return) [ Inimicus tyrannorum. Hist. August. p. 173. In the
      glorious struggle of the senate against Maximin, Valerian acted a
      very spirited part. Hist. August. p. 156.]


      65 (return) [ According to the distinction of Victor, he seems to
      have received the title of Imperator from the army, and that of
      Augustus from the senate.]


      66 (return) [ From Victor and from the medals, Tillemont (tom.
      iii. p. 710) very justly infers, that Gallienus was associated to
      the empire about the month of August of the year 253.]


      I. As the posterity of the Franks compose one of the greatest and
      most enlightened nations of Europe, the powers of learning and
      ingenuity have been exhausted in the discovery of their
      unlettered ancestors. To the tales of credulity have succeeded
      the systems of fancy. Every passage has been sifted, every spot
      has been surveyed, that might possibly reveal some faint traces
      of their origin. It has been supposed that Pannonia, 67 that
      Gaul, that the northern parts of Germany, 68 gave birth to that
      celebrated colony of warriors. At length the most rational
      critics, rejecting the fictitious emigrations of ideal
      conquerors, have acquiesced in a sentiment whose simplicity
      persuades us of its truth. 69 They suppose, that about the year
      two hundred and forty, 70 a new confederacy was formed under the
      name of Franks, by the old inhabitants of the Lower Rhine and the
      Weser. 701 The present circle of Westphalia, the Landgraviate of
      Hesse, and the duchies of Brunswick and Luneburg, were the
      ancient seat of the Chauci who, in their inaccessible morasses,
      defied the Roman arms; 71 of the Cherusci, proud of the fame of
      Arminius; of the Catti, formidable by their firm and intrepid
      infantry; and of several other tribes of inferior power and
      renown. 72 The love of liberty was the ruling passion of these
      Germans; the enjoyment of it their best treasure; the word that
      expressed that enjoyment the most pleasing to their ear. They
      deserved, they assumed, they maintained the honorable epithet of
      Franks, or Freemen; which concealed, though it did not
      extinguish, the peculiar names of the several states of the
      confederacy. 73 Tacit consent, and mutual advantage, dictated the
      first laws of the union; it was gradually cemented by habit and
      experience. The league of the Franks may admit of some comparison
      with the Helvetic body; in which every canton, retaining its
      independent sovereignty, consults with its brethren in the common
      cause, without acknowledging the authority of any supreme head or
      representative assembly. 74 But the principle of the two
      confederacies was extremely different. A peace of two hundred
      years has rewarded the wise and honest policy of the Swiss. An
      inconstant spirit, the thirst of rapine, and a disregard to the
      most solemn treaties, disgraced the character of the Franks.


      67 (return) [ Various systems have been formed to explain a
      difficult passage in Gregory of Tours, l. ii. c. 9.]


      68 (return) [ The Geographer of Ravenna, i. 11, by mentioning
      Mauringania, on the confines of Denmark, as the ancient seat of
      the Franks, gave birth to an ingenious system of Leibritz.]


      69 (return) [ See Cluver. Germania Antiqua, l. iii. c. 20. M.
      Freret, in the Memoires de l’Academie des Inscriptions, tom.
      xviii.]


      70 (return) [ Most probably under the reign of Gordian, from an
      accidental circumstance fully canvassed by Tillemont, tom. iii.
      p. 710, 1181.]


      701 (return) [ The confederation of the Franks appears to have
      been formed, 1. Of the Chauci. 2. Of the Sicambri, the
      inhabitants of the duchy of Berg. 3. Of the Attuarii, to the
      north of the Sicambri, in the principality of Waldeck, between
      the Dimel and the Eder. 4. Of the Bructeri, on the banks of the
      Lippe, and in the Hartz. 5. Of the Chamavii, the Gambrivii of
      Tacitua, who were established, at the time of the Frankish
      confederation, in the country of the Bructeri. 6. Of the Catti,
      in Hessia.—G. The Salii and Cherasci are added. Greenwood’s Hist.
      of Germans, i 193.—M.]


      71 (return) [Plin. Hist. Natur. xvi. l. The Panegyrists
      frequently allude to the morasses of the Franks.]


      72 (return) [ Tacit. Germania, c. 30, 37.]


      73 (return) [ In a subsequent period, most of those old names are
      occasionally mentioned. See some vestiges of them in Cluver.
      Germ. Antiq. l. iii.]


      74 (return) [ Simler de Republica Helvet. cum notis Fuselin.]


      Chapter X: Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus, Valerian And
      Gallienus.—Part III.


      The Romans had long experienced the daring valor of the people of
      Lower Germany. The union of their strength threatened Gaul with a
      more formidable invasion, and required the presence of Gallienus,
      the heir and colleague of Imperial power. 75 Whilst that prince,
      and his infant son Salonius, displayed, in the court of Treves,
      the majesty of the empire, its armies were ably conducted by
      their general, Posthumus, who, though he afterwards betrayed the
      family of Valerian, was ever faithful to the great interests of
      the monarchy. The treacherous language of panegyrics and medals
      darkly announces a long series of victories. Trophies and titles
      attest (if such evidence can attest) the fame of Posthumus, who
      is repeatedly styled the Conqueror of the Germans, and the Savior
      of Gaul. 76


      75 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 27.]


      76 (return) [ M. de Brequigny (in the Memoires de l’Academie,
      tom. xxx.) has given us a very curious life of Posthumus. A
      series of the Augustan History from Medals and Inscriptions has
      been more than once planned, and is still much wanted. * Note: M.
      Eckhel, Keeper of the Cabinet of Medals, and Professor of
      Antiquities at Vienna, lately deceased, has supplied this want by
      his excellent work, Doctrina veterum Nummorum, conscripta a Jos.
      Eckhel, 8 vol. in 4to Vindobona, 1797.—G. Captain Smyth has
      likewise printed (privately) a valuable Descriptive Catologue of
      a series of Large Brass Medals of this period Bedford, 1834.—M.
      1845.]


      But a single fact, the only one indeed of which we have any
      distinct knowledge, erases, in a great measure, these monuments
      of vanity and adulation. The Rhine, though dignified with the
      title of Safeguard of the provinces, was an imperfect barrier
      against the daring spirit of enterprise with which the Franks
      were actuated. Their rapid devastations stretched from the river
      to the foot of the Pyrenees; nor were they stopped by those
      mountains. Spain, which had never dreaded, was unable to resist,
      the inroads of the Germans. During twelve years, the greatest
      part of the reign of Gallienus, that opulent country was the
      theatre of unequal and destructive hostilities. Tarragona, the
      flourishing capital of a peaceful province, was sacked and almost
      destroyed; 77 and so late as the days of Orosius, who wrote in
      the fifth century, wretched cottages, scattered amidst the ruins
      of magnificent cities, still recorded the rage of the barbarians.
      78 When the exhausted country no longer supplied a variety of
      plunder, the Franks seized on some vessels in the ports of Spain,
      79 and transported themselves into Mauritania. The distant
      province was astonished with the fury of these barbarians, who
      seemed to fall from a new world, as their name, manners, and
      complexion, were equally unknown on the coast of Africa. 80


      77 (return) [ Aurel. Victor, c. 33. Instead of Pœne direpto, both
      the sense and the expression require deleto; though indeed, for
      different reasons, it is alike difficult to correct the text of
      the best, and of the worst, writers.]


      78 (return) [ In the time of Ausonius (the end of the fourth
      century) Ilerda or Lerida was in a very ruinous state, (Auson.
      Epist. xxv. 58,) which probably was the consequence of this
      invasion.]


      79 (return) [ Valesius is therefore mistaken in supposing that
      the Franks had invaded Spain by sea.]


      80 (return) [ Aurel. Victor. Eutrop. ix. 6.]


      II. In that part of Upper Saxony, beyond the Elbe, which is at
      present called the Marquisate of Lusace, there existed, in
      ancient times, a sacred wood, the awful seat of the superstition
      of the Suevi. None were permitted to enter the holy precincts,
      without confessing, by their servile bonds and suppliant posture,
      the immediate presence of the sovereign Deity. 81 Patriotism
      contributed, as well as devotion, to consecrate the Sonnenwald,
      or wood of the Semnones. 82 It was universally believed, that the
      nation had received its first existence on that sacred spot. At
      stated periods, the numerous tribes who gloried in the Suevic
      blood, resorted thither by their ambassadors; and the memory of
      their common extraction was perpetrated by barbaric rites and
      human sacrifices. The wide-extended name of Suevi filled the
      interior countries of Germany, from the banks of the Oder to
      those of the Danube. They were distinguished from the other
      Germans by their peculiar mode of dressing their long hair, which
      they gathered into a rude knot on the crown of the head; and they
      delighted in an ornament that showed their ranks more lofty and
      terrible in the eyes of the enemy. 83 Jealous as the Germans were
      of military renown, they all confessed the superior valor of the
      Suevi; and the tribes of the Usipetes and Tencteri, who, with a
      vast army, encountered the dictator Cæsar, declared that they
      esteemed it not a disgrace to have fled before a people to whose
      arms the immortal gods themselves were unequal. 84


      81 (return) [ Tacit.Germania, 38.]


      82 (return) [ Cluver. Germ. Antiq. iii. 25.]


      83 (return) [ Sic Suevi a ceteris Germanis, sic Suerorum ingenui
      a servis separantur. A proud separation!]


      84 (return) [ Cæsar in Bello Gallico, iv. 7.]


      In the reign of the emperor Caracalla, an innumerable swarm of
      Suevi appeared on the banks of the Main, and in the neighborhood
      of the Roman provinces, in quest either of food, of plunder, or
      of glory. 85 The hasty army of volunteers gradually coalesced
      into a great and permanent nation, and, as it was composed from
      so many different tribes, assumed the name of Alemanni, 851 or
      _Allmen_, to denote at once their various lineage and their
      common bravery. 86 The latter was soon felt by the Romans in many
      a hostile inroad. The Alemanni fought chiefly on horseback; but
      their cavalry was rendered still more formidable by a mixture of
      light infantry, selected from the bravest and most active of the
      youth, whom frequent exercise had inured to accompany the
      horsemen in the longest march, the most rapid charge, or the most
      precipitate retreat. 87


      85 (return) [ Victor in Caracal. Dion Cassius, lxvii. p. 1350.]


      851 (return) [ The nation of the Alemanni was not originally
      formed by the Suavi properly so called; these have always
      preserved their own name. Shortly afterwards they made (A. D.
      357) an irruption into Rhætia, and it was not long after that
      they were reunited with the Alemanni. Still they have always been
      a distinct people; at the present day, the people who inhabit the
      north-west of the Black Forest call themselves Schwaben,
      Suabians, Sueves, while those who inhabit near the Rhine, in
      Ortenau, the Brisgaw, the Margraviate of Baden, do not consider
      themselves Suabians, and are by origin Alemanni. The Teucteri and
      the Usipetæ, inhabitants of the interior and of the north of
      Westphalia, formed, says Gatterer, the nucleus of the Alemannic
      nation; they occupied the country where the name of the Alemanni
      first appears, as conquered in 213, by Caracalla. They were well
      trained to fight on horseback, (according to Tacitus, Germ. c.
      32;) and Aurelius Victor gives the same praise to the Alemanni:
      finally, they never made part of the Frankish league. The
      Alemanni became subsequently a centre round which gathered a
      multitude of German tribes, See Eumen. Panegyr. c. 2. Amm. Marc.
      xviii. 2, xxix. 4.—G. ——The question whether the Suevi was a
      generic name comprehending the clans which peopled central
      Germany, is rather hastily decided by M. Guizot Mr. Greenwood,
      who has studied the modern German writers on their own origin,
      supposes the Suevi, Alemanni, and Marcomanni, one people, under
      different appellations. History of Germany, vol i.—M.]


      86 (return) [ This etymology (far different from those which
      amuse the fancy of the learned) is preserved by Asinius
      Quadratus, an original historian, quoted by Agathias, i. c. 5.]


      87 (return) [ The Suevi engaged Cæsar in this manner, and the
      manœuvre deserved the approbation of the conqueror, (in Bello
      Gallico, i. 48.)]


      This warlike people of Germans had been astonished by the immense
      preparations of Alexander Severus; they were dismayed by the arms
      of his successor, a barbarian equal in valor and fierceness to
      themselves. But still hovering on the frontiers of the empire,
      they increased the general disorder that ensued after the death
      of Decius. They inflicted severe wounds on the rich provinces of
      Gaul; they were the first who removed the veil that covered the
      feeble majesty of Italy. A numerous body of the Alemanni
      penetrated across the Danube and through the Rhætian Alps into
      the plains of Lombardy, advanced as far as Ravenna, and displayed
      the victorious banners of barbarians almost in sight of Rome. 88


      88 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 215, 216. Dexippus in the
      Excerpts. Legationam, p. 8. Hieronym. Chron. Orosius, vii. 22.]


      The insult and the danger rekindled in the senate some sparks of
      their ancient virtue. Both the emperors were engaged in far
      distant wars, Valerian in the East, and Gallienus on the Rhine.
      All the hopes and resources of the Romans were in themselves. In
      this emergency, the senators resumed the defence of the republic,
      drew out the Prætorian guards, who had been left to garrison the
      capital, and filled up their numbers, by enlisting into the
      public service the stoutest and most willing of the Plebeians.
      The Alemanni, astonished with the sudden appearance of an army
      more numerous than their own, retired into Germany, laden with
      spoil; and their retreat was esteemed as a victory by the
      unwarlike Romans. 89


      89 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 34.]


      When Gallienus received the intelligence that his capital was
      delivered from the barbarians, he was much less delighted than
      alarmed with the courage of the senate, since it might one day
      prompt them to rescue the public from domestic tyranny as well as
      from foreign invasion. His timid ingratitude was published to his
      subjects, in an edict which prohibited the senators from
      exercising any military employment, and even from approaching the
      camps of the legions. But his fears were groundless. The rich and
      luxurious nobles, sinking into their natural character, accepted,
      as a favor, this disgraceful exemption from military service; and
      as long as they were indulged in the enjoyment of their baths,
      their theatres, and their villas, they cheerfully resigned the
      more dangerous cares of empire to the rough hands of peasants and
      soldiers. 90


      90 (return) [ Aurel. Victor, in Gallieno et Probo. His complaints
      breathe as uncommon spirit of freedom.]


      Another invasion of the Alemanni, of a more formidable aspect,
      but more glorious event, is mentioned by a writer of the lower
      empire. Three hundred thousand are said to have been vanquished,
      in a battle near Milan, by Gallienus in person, at the head of
      only ten thousand Romans. 91 We may, however, with great
      probability, ascribe this incredible victory either to the
      credulity of the historian, or to some exaggerated exploits of
      one of the emperor’s lieutenants. It was by arms of a very
      different nature, that Gallienus endeavored to protect Italy from
      the fury of the Germans. He espoused Pipa, the daughter of a king
      of the Marcomanni, a Suevic tribe, which was often confounded
      with the Alemanni in their wars and conquests. 92 To the father,
      as the price of his alliance, he granted an ample settlement in
      Pannonia. The native charms of unpolished beauty seem to have
      fixed the daughter in the affections of the inconstant emperor,
      and the bands of policy were more firmly connected by those of
      love. But the haughty prejudice of Rome still refused the name of
      marriage to the profane mixture of a citizen and a barbarian; and
      has stigmatized the German princess with the opprobrious title of
      concubine of Gallienus. 93


      91 (return) [ Zonaras, l. xii. p. 631.]


      92 (return) [ One of the Victors calls him king of the
      Marcomanni; the other of the Germans.]


      93 (return) [ See Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iii. p.
      398, &c.]


      III. We have already traced the emigration of the Goths from
      Scandinavia, or at least from Prussia, to the mouth of the
      Borysthenes, and have followed their victorious arms from the
      Borysthenes to the Danube. Under the reigns of Valerian and
      Gallienus, the frontier of the last-mentioned river was
      perpetually infested by the inroads of Germans and Sarmatians;
      but it was defended by the Romans with more than usual firmness
      and success. The provinces that were the seat of war, recruited
      the armies of Rome with an inexhaustible supply of hardy
      soldiers; and more than one of these Illyrian peasants attained
      the station, and displayed the abilities, of a general. Though
      flying parties of the barbarians, who incessantly hovered on the
      banks of the Danube, penetrated sometimes to the confines of
      Italy and Macedonia, their progress was commonly checked, or
      their return intercepted, by the Imperial lieutenants. 94 But the
      great stream of the Gothic hostilities was diverted into a very
      different channel. The Goths, in their new settlement of the
      Ukraine, soon became masters of the northern coast of the Euxine:
      to the south of that inland sea were situated the soft and
      wealthy provinces of Asia Minor, which possessed all that could
      attract, and nothing that could resist, a barbarian conqueror.


      94 (return) [ See the lives of Claudius, Aurelian, and Probus, in
      the Augustan History.]


      The banks of the Borysthenes are only sixty miles distant from
      the narrow entrance 95 of the peninsula of Crim Tartary, known to
      the ancients under the name of Chersonesus Taurica. 96 On that
      inhospitable shore, Euripides, embellishing with exquisite art
      the tales of antiquity, has placed the scene of one of his most
      affecting tragedies. 97 The bloody sacrifices of Diana, the
      arrival of Orestes and Pylades, and the triumph of virtue and
      religion over savage fierceness, serve to represent an historical
      truth, that the Tauri, the original inhabitants of the peninsula,
      were, in some degree, reclaimed from their brutal manners by a
      gradual intercourse with the Grecian colonies, which settled
      along the maritime coast. The little kingdom of Bosphorus, whose
      capital was situated on the Straits, through which the Mæotis
      communicates itself to the Euxine, was composed of degenerate
      Greeks and half-civilized barbarians. It subsisted, as an
      independent state, from the time of the Peloponnesian war, 98 was
      at last swallowed up by the ambition of Mithridates, 99 and, with
      the rest of his dominions, sunk under the weight of the Roman
      arms. From the reign of Augustus, 100 the kings of Bosphorus were
      the humble, but not useless, allies of the empire. By presents,
      by arms, and by a slight fortification drawn across the Isthmus,
      they effectually guarded, against the roving plunderers of
      Sarmatia, the access of a country which, from its peculiar
      situation and convenient harbors, commanded the Euxine Sea and
      Asia Minor. 101 As long as the sceptre was possessed by a lineal
      succession of kings, they acquitted themselves of their important
      charge with vigilance and success. Domestic factions, and the
      fears, or private interest, of obscure usurpers, who seized on
      the vacant throne, admitted the Goths into the heart of
      Bosphorus. With the acquisition of a superfluous waste of fertile
      soil, the conquerors obtained the command of a naval force,
      sufficient to transport their armies to the coast of Asia. 102
      These ships used in the navigation of the Euxine were of a very
      singular construction. They were slight flat-bottomed barks
      framed of timber only, without the least mixture of iron, and
      occasionally covered with a shelving roof, on the appearance of a
      tempest. 103 In these floating houses, the Goths carelessly
      trusted themselves to the mercy of an unknown sea, under the
      conduct of sailors pressed into the service, and whose skill and
      fidelity were equally suspicious. But the hopes of plunder had
      banished every idea of danger, and a natural fearlessness of
      temper supplied in their minds the more rational confidence,
      which is the just result of knowledge and experience. Warriors of
      such a daring spirit must have often murmured against the
      cowardice of their guides, who required the strongest assurances
      of a settled calm before they would venture to embark; and would
      scarcely ever be tempted to lose sight of the land. Such, at
      least, is the practice of the modern Turks; 104 and they are
      probably not inferior, in the art of navigation, to the ancient
      inhabitants of Bosphorus.


      95 (return) [ It is about half a league in breadth. Genealogical
      History of the Tartars, p 598.]


      96 (return) [ M. de Peyssonel, who had been French Consul at
      Caffa, in his Observations sur les Peuples Barbares, que ont
      habite les bords du Danube]


      97 (return) [ Eeripides in Iphigenia in Taurid.]


      98 (return) [ Strabo, l. vii. p. 309. The first kings of
      Bosphorus were the allies of Athens.]


      99 (return) [ Appian in Mithridat.]


      100 (return) [ It was reduced by the arms of Agrippa. Orosius,
      vi. 21. Eu tropius, vii. 9. The Romans once advanced within three
      days’ march of the Tanais. Tacit. Annal. xii. 17.]


      101 (return) [ See the Toxaris of Lucian, if we credit the
      sincerity and the virtues of the Scythian, who relates a great
      war of his nation against the kings of Bosphorus.]


      102 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 28.]


      103 (return) [ Strabo, l. xi. Tacit. Hist. iii. 47. They were
      called Camarœ.]


      104 (return) [ See a very natural picture of the Euxine
      navigation, in the xvith letter of Tournefort.]


      The fleet of the Goths, leaving the coast of Circassia on the
      left hand, first appeared before Pityus, 105 the utmost limits of
      the Roman provinces; a city provided with a convenient port, and
      fortified with a strong wall. Here they met with a resistance
      more obstinate than they had reason to expect from the feeble
      garrison of a distant fortress. They were repulsed; and their
      disappointment seemed to diminish the terror of the Gothic name.
      As long as Successianus, an officer of superior rank and merit,
      defended that frontier, all their efforts were ineffectual; but
      as soon as he was removed by Valerian to a more honorable but
      less important station, they resumed the attack of Pityus; and by
      the destruction of that city, obliterated the memory of their
      former disgrace. 106


      105 (return) [ Arrian places the frontier garrison at Dioscurias,
      or Sebastopolis, forty-four miles to the east of Pityus. The
      garrison of Phasis consisted in his time of only four hundred
      foot. See the Periplus of the Euxine. * Note: Pityus is
      Pitchinda, according to D’Anville, ii. 115.—G. Rather Boukoun.—M.
      Dioscurias is Iskuriah.—G.]


      106 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 30.]


      Circling round the eastern extremity of the Euxine Sea, the
      navigation from Pityus to Trebizond is about three hundred miles.
      107 The course of the Goths carried them in sight of the country
      of Colchis, so famous by the expedition of the Argonauts; and
      they even attempted, though without success, to pillage a rich
      temple at the mouth of the River Phasis. Trebizond, celebrated in
      the retreat of the ten thousand as an ancient colony of Greeks,
      108 derived its wealth and splendor from the magnificence of the
      emperor Hadrian, who had constructed an artificial port on a
      coast left destitute by nature of secure harbors. 109 The city
      was large and populous; a double enclosure of walls seemed to
      defy the fury of the Goths, and the usual garrison had been
      strengthened by a reënforcement of ten thousand men. But there
      are not any advantages capable of supplying the absence of
      discipline and vigilance. The numerous garrison of Trebizond,
      dissolved in riot and luxury, disdained to guard their
      impregnable fortifications. The Goths soon discovered the supine
      negligence of the besieged, erected a lofty pile of fascines,
      ascended the walls in the silence of the night, and entered the
      defenceless city sword in hand. A general massacre of the people
      ensued, whilst the affrighted soldiers escaped through the
      opposite gates of the town. The most holy temples, and the most
      splendid edifices, were involved in a common destruction. The
      booty that fell into the hands of the Goths was immense: the
      wealth of the adjacent countries had been deposited in Trebizond,
      as in a secure place of refuge. The number of captives was
      incredible, as the victorious barbarians ranged without
      opposition through the extensive province of Pontus. 110 The rich
      spoils of Trebizond filled a great fleet of ships that had been
      found in the port. The robust youth of the sea-coast were chained
      to the oar; and the Goths, satisfied with the success of their
      first naval expedition, returned in triumph to their new
      establishment in the kingdom of Bosphorus. 111


      107 (return) [ Arrian (in Periplo Maris Euxine, p. 130) calls the
      distance 2610 stadia.]


      108 (return) [ Xenophon, Anabasis, l. iv. p. 348, edit.
      Hutchinson. Note: Fallmerayer (Geschichte des Kaiserthums von
      Trapezunt, p. 6, &c) assigns a very ancient date to the first
      (Pelasgic) foundation of Trapezun (Trebizond)—M.]


      109 (return) [ Arrian, p. 129. The general observation is
      Tournefort’s.]


      110 (return) [ See an epistle of Gregory Thaumaturgus, bishop of
      Neo-Cæoarea, quoted by Mascou, v. 37.]


      111 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 32, 33.]


      The second expedition of the Goths was undertaken with greater
      powers of men and ships; but they steered a different course,
      and, disdaining the exhausted provinces of Pontus, followed the
      western coast of the Euxine, passed before the wide mouths of the
      Borysthenes, the Niester, and the Danube, and increasing their
      fleet by the capture of a great number of fishing barks, they
      approached the narrow outlet through which the Euxine Sea pours
      its waters into the Mediterranean, and divides the continents of
      Europe and Asia. The garrison of Chalcedon was encamped near the
      temple of Jupiter Urius, on a promontory that commanded the
      entrance of the Strait; and so inconsiderable were the dreaded
      invasions of the barbarians that this body of troops surpassed in
      number the Gothic army. But it was in numbers alone that they
      surpassed it. They deserted with precipitation their advantageous
      post, and abandoned the town of Chalcedon, most plentifully
      stored with arms and money, to the discretion of the conquerors.
      Whilst they hesitated whether they should prefer the sea or land,
      Europe or Asia, for the scene of their hostilities, a perfidious
      fugitive pointed out Nicomedia, 1111 once the capital of the
      kings of Bithynia, as a rich and easy conquest. He guided the
      march, which was only sixty miles from the camp of Chalcedon, 112
      directed the resistless attack, and partook of the booty; for the
      Goths had learned sufficient policy to reward the traitor whom
      they detested. Nice, Prusa, Apamæa, Cius, 1121 cities that had
      sometimes rivalled, or imitated, the splendor of Nicomedia, were
      involved in the same calamity, which, in a few weeks, raged
      without control through the whole province of Bithynia. Three
      hundred years of peace, enjoyed by the soft inhabitants of Asia,
      had abolished the exercise of arms, and removed the apprehension
      of danger. The ancient walls were suffered to moulder away, and
      all the revenue of the most opulent cities was reserved for the
      construction of baths, temples, and theatres. 113


      1111 (return) [ It has preserved its name, joined to the
      preposition of place in that of Nikmid. D’Anv. Geog. Anc. ii.
      28.—G.]


      112 (return) [ Itiner. Hierosolym. p. 572. Wesseling.]


      1121 (return) [ Now Isnik, Bursa, Mondania Ghio or Kemlik D’Anv.
      ii. 23.—G.]


      113 (return) [ Zosimus, l.. p. 32, 33.]


      When the city of Cyzicus withstood the utmost effort of
      Mithridates, 114 it was distinguished by wise laws, a naval power
      of two hundred galleys, and three arsenals, of arms, of military
      engines, and of corn. 115 It was still the seat of wealth and
      luxury; but of its ancient strength, nothing remained except the
      situation, in a little island of the Propontis, connected with
      the continent of Asia only by two bridges. From the recent sack
      of Prusa, the Goths advanced within eighteen miles 116 of the
      city, which they had devoted to destruction; but the ruin of
      Cyzicus was delayed by a fortunate accident. The season was
      rainy, and the Lake Apolloniates, the reservoir of all the
      springs of Mount Olympus, rose to an uncommon height. The little
      river of Rhyndacus, which issues from the lake, swelled into a
      broad and rapid stream, and stopped the progress of the Goths.
      Their retreat to the maritime city of Heraclea, where the fleet
      had probably been stationed, was attended by a long train of
      wagons, laden with the spoils of Bithynia, and was marked by the
      flames of Nico and Nicomedia, which they wantonly burnt. 117 Some
      obscure hints are mentioned of a doubtful combat that secured
      their retreat. 118 But even a complete victory would have been of
      little moment, as the approach of the autumnal equinox summoned
      them to hasten their return. To navigate the Euxine before the
      month of May, or after that of September, is esteemed by the
      modern Turks the most unquestionable instance of rashness and
      folly. 119


      114 (return) [ He besieged the place with 400 galleys, 150,000
      foot, and a numerous cavalry. See Plutarch in Lucul. Appian in
      Mithridat Cicero pro Lege Manilia, c. 8.]


      115 (return) [ Strabo, l. xii. p. 573.]


      116 (return) [ Pocock’s Description of the East, l. ii. c. 23,
      24.]


      117 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 33.]


      118 (return) [ Syncellus tells an unintelligible story of Prince
      Odenathus, who defeated the Goths, and who was killed by Prince
      Odenathus.]


      119 (return) [Footnote 119: Voyages de Chardin, tom. i. p. 45. He
      sailed with the Turks from Constantinople to Caffa.]


      When we are informed that the third fleet, equipped by the Goths
      in the ports of Bosphorus, consisted of five hundred sails of
      ships, 120 our ready imagination instantly computes and
      multiplies the formidable armament; but, as we are assured by the
      judicious Strabo, 121 that the piratical vessels used by the
      barbarians of Pontus and the Lesser Scythia, were not capable of
      containing more than twenty-five or thirty men we may safely
      affirm, that fifteen thousand warriors, at the most, embarked in
      this great expedition. Impatient of the limits of the Euxine,
      they steered their destructive course from the Cimmerian to the
      Thracian Bosphorus. When they had almost gained the middle of the
      Straits, they were suddenly driven back to the entrance of them;
      till a favorable wind, springing up the next day, carried them in
      a few hours into the placid sea, or rather lake, of the
      Propontis. Their landing on the little island of Cyzicus was
      attended with the ruin of that ancient and noble city. From
      thence issuing again through the narrow passage of the
      Hellespont, they pursued their winding navigation amidst the
      numerous islands scattered over the Archipelago, or the Ægean
      Sea. The assistance of captives and deserters must have been very
      necessary to pilot their vessels, and to direct their various
      incursions, as well on the coast of Greece as on that of Asia. At
      length the Gothic fleet anchored in the port of Piræus, five
      miles distant from Athens, 122 which had attempted to make some
      preparations for a vigorous defence. Cleodamus, one of the
      engineers employed by the emperor’s orders to fortify the
      maritime cities against the Goths, had already begun to repair
      the ancient walls, fallen to decay since the time of Scylla. The
      efforts of his skill were ineffectual, and the barbarians became
      masters of the native seat of the muses and the arts. But while
      the conquerors abandoned themselves to the license of plunder and
      intemperance, their fleet, that lay with a slender guard in the
      harbor of Piræus, was unexpectedly attacked by the brave
      Dexippus, who, flying with the engineer Cleodamus from the sack
      of Athens, collected a hasty band of volunteers, peasants as well
      as soldiers, and in some measure avenged the calamities of his
      country. 123


      120 (return) [ Syncellus (p. 382) speaks of this expedition, as
      undertaken by the Heruli.]


      121 (return) [ Strabo, l. xi. p. 495.]


      122 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 7.]


      123 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 181. Victor, c. 33. Orosius, vii.
      42. Zosimus, l. i. p. 35. Zonaras, l. xii. 635. Syncellus, p.
      382. It is not without some attention, that we can explain and
      conciliate their imperfect hints. We can still discover some
      traces of the partiality of Dexippus, in the relation of his own
      and his countrymen’s exploits. * Note: According to a new
      fragment of Dexippus, published by Mai, the 2000 men took up a
      strong position in a mountainous and woods district, and kept up
      a harassing warfare. He expresses a hope of being speedily joined
      by the Imperial fleet. Dexippus in rov. Byzantinorum Collect a
      Niebuhr, p. 26, 8—M.]


      But this exploit, whatever lustre it might shed on the declining
      age of Athens, served rather to irritate than to subdue the
      undaunted spirit of the northern invaders. A general
      conflagration blazed out at the same time in every district of
      Greece. Thebes and Argos, Corinth and Sparta, which had formerly
      waged such memorable wars against each other, were now unable to
      bring an army into the field, or even to defend their ruined
      fortifications. The rage of war, both by land and by sea, spread
      from the eastern point of Sunium to the western coast of Epirus.
      The Goths had already advanced within sight of Italy, when the
      approach of such imminent danger awakened the indolent Gallienus
      from his dream of pleasure. The emperor appeared in arms; and his
      presence seems to have checked the ardor, and to have divided the
      strength, of the enemy. Naulobatus, a chief of the Heruli,
      accepted an honorable capitulation, entered with a large body of
      his countrymen into the service of Rome, and was invested with
      the ornaments of the consular dignity, which had never before
      been profaned by the hands of a barbarian. 124 Great numbers of
      the Goths, disgusted with the perils and hardships of a tedious
      voyage, broke into Mæsia, with a design of forcing their way over
      the Danube to their settlements in the Ukraine. The wild attempt
      would have proved inevitable destruction, if the discord of the
      Roman generals had not opened to the barbarians the means of an
      escape. 125 The small remainder of this destroying host returned
      on board their vessels; and measuring back their way through the
      Hellespont and the Bosphorus, ravaged in their passage the shores
      of Troy, whose fame, immortalized by Homer, will probably survive
      the memory of the Gothic conquests. As soon as they found
      themselves in safety within the basin of the Euxine, they landed
      at Anchialus in Thrace, near the foot of Mount Hæmus; and, after
      all their toils, indulged themselves in the use of those pleasant
      and salutary hot baths. What remained of the voyage was a short
      and easy navigation. 126 Such was the various fate of this third
      and greatest of their naval enterprises. It may seem difficult to
      conceive how the original body of fifteen thousand warriors could
      sustain the losses and divisions of so bold an adventure. But as
      their numbers were gradually wasted by the sword, by shipwrecks,
      and by the influence of a warm climate, they were perpetually
      renewed by troops of banditti and deserters, who flocked to the
      standard of plunder, and by a crowd of fugitive slaves, often of
      German or Sarmatian extraction, who eagerly seized the glorious
      opportunity of freedom and revenge. In these expeditions, the
      Gothic nation claimed a superior share of honor and danger; but
      the tribes that fought under the Gothic banners are sometimes
      distinguished and sometimes confounded in the imperfect histories
      of that age; and as the barbarian fleets seemed to issue from the
      mouth of the Tanais, the vague but familiar appellation of
      Scythians was frequently bestowed on the mixed multitude. 127


      124 (return) [Syncellus, p. 382. This body of Heruli was for a
      long time faithful and famous.]


      125 (return) [ Claudius, who commanded on the Danube, thought
      with propriety and acted with spirit. His colleague was jealous
      of his fame Hist. August. p. 181.]


      126 (return) [ Jornandes, c. 20.]


      127 (return) [ Zosimus and the Greeks (as the author of the
      Philopatris) give the name of Scythians to those whom Jornandes,
      and the Latin writers, constantly represent as Goths.]


      Chapter X: Emperors Decius, Gallus, Æmilianus, Valerian And
      Gallienus.—Part IV.


      In the general calamities of mankind, the death of an individual,
      however exalted, the ruin of an edifice, however famous, are
      passed over with careless inattention. Yet we cannot forget that
      the temple of Diana at Ephesus, after having risen with
      increasing splendor from seven repeated misfortunes, 128 was
      finally burnt by the Goths in their third naval invasion. The
      arts of Greece, and the wealth of Asia, had conspired to erect
      that sacred and magnificent structure. It was supported by a
      hundred and twenty-seven marble columns of the Ionic order. They
      were the gifts of devout monarchs, and each was sixty feet high.
      The altar was adorned with the masterly sculptures of Praxiteles,
      who had, perhaps, selected from the favorite legends of the place
      the birth of the divine children of Latona, the concealment of
      Apollo after the slaughter of the Cyclops, and the clemency of
      Bacchus to the vanquished Amazons. 129 Yet the length of the
      temple of Ephesus was only four hundred and twenty-five feet,
      about two thirds of the measure of the church of St. Peter’s at
      Rome. 130 In the other dimensions, it was still more inferior to
      that sublime production of modern architecture. The spreading
      arms of a Christian cross require a much greater breadth than the
      oblong temples of the Pagans; and the boldest artists of
      antiquity would have been startled at the proposal of raising in
      the air a dome of the size and proportions of the Pantheon. The
      temple of Diana was, however, admired as one of the wonders of
      the world. Successive empires, the Persian, the Macedonian, and
      the Roman, had revered its sanctity and enriched its splendor.
      131 But the rude savages of the Baltic were destitute of a taste
      for the elegant arts, and they despised the ideal terrors of a
      foreign superstition. 132


      128 (return) [ Hist. Aug. p. 178. Jornandes, c. 20.]


      129 (return) [ Strabo, l. xiv. p. 640. Vitruvius, l. i. c. i.
      præfat l vii. Tacit Annal. iii. 61. Plin. Hist. Nat. xxxvi. 14.]


      130 (return) [ The length of St. Peter’s is 840 Roman palms; each
      palm is very little short of nine English inches. See Greaves’s
      Miscellanies vol. i. p. 233; on the Roman Foot. * Note: St.
      Paul’s Cathedral is 500 feet. Dallaway on Architecture—M.]


      131 (return) [ The policy, however, of the Romans induced them to
      abridge the extent of the sanctuary or asylum, which by
      successive privileges had spread itself two stadia round the
      temple. Strabo, l. xiv. p. 641. Tacit. Annal. iii. 60, &c.]


      132 (return) [ They offered no sacrifices to the Grecian gods.
      See Epistol Gregor. Thaumat.]


      Another circumstance is related of these invasions, which might
      deserve our notice, were it not justly to be suspected as the
      fanciful conceit of a recent sophist. We are told that in the
      sack of Athens the Goths had collected all the libraries, and
      were on the point of setting fire to this funeral pile of Grecian
      learning, had not one of their chiefs, of more refined policy
      than his brethren, dissuaded them from the design; by the
      profound observation, that as long as the Greeks were addicted to
      the study of books, they would never apply themselves to the
      exercise of arms. 133 The sagacious counsellor (should the truth
      of the fact be admitted) reasoned like an ignorant barbarian. In
      the most polite and powerful nations, genius of every kind has
      displayed itself about the same period; and the age of science
      has generally been the age of military virtue and success.


      133 (return) [ Zonaras, l. xii. p. 635. Such an anecdote was
      perfectly suited to the taste of Montaigne. He makes use of it in
      his agreeable Essay on Pedantry, l. i. c. 24.]


      IV. The new sovereign of Persia, Artaxerxes and his son Sapor,
      had triumphed (as we have already seen) over the house of
      Arsaces. Of the many princes of that ancient race. Chosroes, king
      of Armenia, had alone preserved both his life and his
      independence. He defended himself by the natural strength of his
      country; by the perpetual resort of fugitives and malecontents;
      by the alliance of the Romans, and above all, by his own courage.


      Invincible in arms, during a thirty years’ war, he was at length
      assassinated by the emissaries of Sapor, king of Persia. The
      patriotic satraps of Armenia, who asserted the freedom and
      dignity of the crown, implored the protection of Rome in favor of
      Tiridates, the lawful heir. But the son of Chosroes was an
      infant, the allies were at a distance, and the Persian monarch
      advanced towards the frontier at the head of an irresistible
      force. Young Tiridates, the future hope of his country, was saved
      by the fidelity of a servant, and Armenia continued above
      twenty-seven years a reluctant province of the great monarchy of
      Persia. 134 Elated with this easy conquest, and presuming on the
      distresses or the degeneracy of the Romans, Sapor obliged the
      strong garrisons of Carrhæ and Nisibis 1341 to surrender, and
      spread devastation and terror on either side of the Euphrates.


      134 (return) [ Moses Chorenensis, l. ii. c. 71, 73, 74. Zonaras,
      l. xii. p. 628. The anthentic relation of the Armenian historian
      serves to rectify the confused account of the Greek. The latter
      talks of the children of Tiridates, who at that time was himself
      an infant. (Compare St Martin Memoires sur l’Armenie, i. p.
      301.—M.)]


      1341 (return) [ Nisibis, according to Persian authors, was taken
      by a miracle, the wall fell, in compliance with the prayers of
      the army. Malcolm’s Persia, l. 76.—M]


      The loss of an important frontier, the ruin of a faithful and
      natural ally, and the rapid success of Sapor’s ambition, affected
      Rome with a deep sense of the insult as well as of the danger.
      Valerian flattered himself, that the vigilance of his lieutenants
      would sufficiently provide for the safety of the Rhine and of the
      Danube; but he resolved, notwithstanding his advanced age, to
      march in person to the defence of the Euphrates.


      During his progress through Asia Minor, the naval enterprises of
      the Goths were suspended, and the afflicted province enjoyed a
      transient and fallacious calm. He passed the Euphrates,
      encountered the Persian monarch near the walls of Edessa, was
      vanquished, and taken prisoner by Sapor. The particulars of this
      great event are darkly and imperfectly represented; yet, by the
      glimmering light which is afforded us, we may discover a long
      series of imprudence, of error, and of deserved misfortunes on
      the side of the Roman emperor. He reposed an implicit confidence
      in Macrianus, his Prætorian præfect. 135 That worthless minister
      rendered his master formidable only to the oppressed subjects,
      and contemptible to the enemies of Rome. 136 By his weak or
      wicked counsels, the Imperial army was betrayed into a situation
      where valor and military skill were equally unavailing. 137 The
      vigorous attempt of the Romans to cut their way through the
      Persian host was repulsed with great slaughter; 138 and Sapor,
      who encompassed the camp with superior numbers, patiently waited
      till the increasing rage of famine and pestilence had insured his
      victory. The licentious murmurs of the legions soon accused
      Valerian as the cause of their calamities; their seditious
      clamors demanded an instant capitulation. An immense sum of gold
      was offered to purchase the permission of a disgraceful retreat.
      But the Persian, conscious of his superiority, refused the money
      with disdain; and detaining the deputies, advanced in order of
      battle to the foot of the Roman rampart, and insisted on a
      personal conference with the emperor. Valerian was reduced to the
      necessity of intrusting his life and dignity to the faith of an
      enemy. The interview ended as it was natural to expect. The
      emperor was made a prisoner, and his astonished troops laid down
      their arms. 139 In such a moment of triumph, the pride and policy
      of Sapor prompted him to fill the vacant throne with a successor
      entirely dependent on his pleasure. Cyriades, an obscure fugitive
      of Antioch, stained with every vice, was chosen to dishonor the
      Roman purple; and the will of the Persian victor could not fail
      of being ratified by the acclamations, however reluctant, of the
      captive army. 140


      135 (return) [ Hist. Aug. p. 191. As Macrianus was an enemy to
      the Christians, they charged him with being a magician.]


      136 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 33.]


      137 (return) [ Hist. Aug. p. 174.]


      138 (return) [ Victor in Cæsar. Eutropius, ix. 7.]


      139 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 33. Zonaras, l. xii. p. 630.
      Peter Patricius, in the Excerpta Legat. p. 29.]


      140 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 185. The reign of Cyriades
      appears in that collection prior to the death of Valerian; but I
      have preferred a probable series of events to the doubtful
      chronology of a most inaccurate writer]


      The Imperial slave was eager to secure the favor of his master by
      an act of treason to his native country. He conducted Sapor over
      the Euphrates, and, by the way of Chalcis, to the metropolis of
      the East. So rapid were the motions of the Persian cavalry, that,
      if we may credit a very judicious historian, 141 the city of
      Antioch was surprised when the idle multitude was fondly gazing
      on the amusements of the theatre. The splendid buildings of
      Antioch, private as well as public, were either pillaged or
      destroyed; and the numerous inhabitants were put to the sword, or
      led away into captivity. 142 The tide of devastation was stopped
      for a moment by the resolution of the high priest of Emesa.
      Arrayed in his sacerdotal robes, he appeared at the head of a
      great body of fanatic peasants, armed only with slings, and
      defended his god and his property from the sacrilegious hands of
      the followers of Zoroaster. 143 But the ruin of Tarsus, and of
      many other cities, furnishes a melancholy proof that, except in
      this singular instance, the conquest of Syria and Cilicia
      scarcely interrupted the progress of the Persian arms. The
      advantages of the narrow passes of Mount Taurus were abandoned,
      in which an invader, whose principal force consisted in his
      cavalry, would have been engaged in a very unequal combat: and
      Sapor was permitted to form the siege of Cæsarea, the capital of
      Cappadocia; a city, though of the second rank, which was supposed
      to contain four hundred thousand inhabitants. Demosthenes
      commanded in the place, not so much by the commission of the
      emperor, as in the voluntary defence of his country. For a long
      time he deferred its fate; and when at last Cæsarea was betrayed
      by the perfidy of a physician, he cut his way through the
      Persians, who had been ordered to exert their utmost diligence to
      take him alive. This heroic chief escaped the power of a foe who
      might either have honored or punished his obstinate valor; but
      many thousands of his fellow-citizens were involved in a general
      massacre, and Sapor is accused of treating his prisoners with
      wanton and unrelenting cruelty. 144 Much should undoubtedly be
      allowed for national animosity, much for humbled pride and
      impotent revenge; yet, upon the whole, it is certain, that the
      same prince, who, in Armenia, had displayed the mild aspect of a
      legislator, showed himself to the Romans under the stern features
      of a conqueror. He despaired of making any permanent
      establishment in the empire, and sought only to leave behind him
      a wasted desert, whilst he transported into Persia the people and
      the treasures of the provinces. 145


      141 (return) [ The sack of Antioch, anticipated by some
      historians, is assigned, by the decisive testimony of Ammianus
      Marcellinus, to the reign of Gallienus, xxiii. 5. * Note: Heyne,
      in his note on Zosimus, contests this opinion of Gibbon and
      observes, that the testimony of Ammianus is in fact by no means
      clear, decisive. Gallienus and Valerian reigned together.
      Zosimus, in a passage, l. iiii. 32, 8, distinctly places this
      event before the capture of Valerian.—M.]


      142 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 35.]


      143 (return) [ John Malala, tom. i. p. 391. He corrupts this
      probable event by some fabulous circumstances.]


      144 (return) [ Zonaras, l. xii. p. 630. Deep valleys were filled
      up with the slain. Crowds of prisoners were driven to water like
      beasts, and many perished for want of food.]


      145 (return) [ Zosimus, l. i. p. 25 asserts, that Sapor, had he
      not preferred spoil to conquest, might have remained master of
      Asia.]


      At the time when the East trembled at the name of Sapor, he
      received a present not unworthy of the greatest kings; a long
      train of camels, laden with the most rare and valuable
      merchandises. The rich offering was accompanied with an epistle,
      respectful, but not servile, from Odenathus, one of the noblest
      and most opulent senators of Palmyra. “Who is this Odenathus,”
      (said the haughty victor, and he commanded that the present
      should be cast into the Euphrates,) “that he thus insolently
      presumes to write to his lord? If he entertains a hope of
      mitigating his punishment, let him fall prostrate before the foot
      of our throne, with his hands bound behind his back. Should he
      hesitate, swift destruction shall be poured on his head, on his
      whole race, and on his country.” 146 The desperate extremity to
      which the Palmyrenian was reduced, called into action all the
      latent powers of his soul. He met Sapor; but he met him in arms.


      Infusing his own spirit into a little army collected from the
      villages of Syria 147 and the tents of the desert, 148 he hovered
      round the Persian host, harassed their retreat, carried off part
      of the treasure, and, what was dearer than any treasure, several
      of the women of the great king; who was at last obliged to repass
      the Euphrates with some marks of haste and confusion. 149 By this
      exploit, Odenathus laid the foundations of his future fame and
      fortunes. The majesty of Rome, oppressed by a Persian, was
      protected by a Syrian or Arab of Palmyra.


      146 (return) [ Peter Patricius in Excerpt. Leg. p. 29.]


      147 (return) [ Syrorum agrestium manu. Sextus Rufus, c. 23. Rufus
      Victor the Augustan History, (p. 192,) and several inscriptions,
      agree in making Odenathus a citizen of Palmyra.]


      148 (return) [ He possessed so powerful an interest among the
      wandering tribes, that Procopius (Bell. Persic. l. ii. c. 5) and
      John Malala, (tom. i. p. 391) style him Prince of the Saracens.]


      149 (return) [ Peter Patricius, p. 25.]


      The voice of history, which is often little more than the organ
      of hatred or flattery, reproaches Sapor with a proud abuse of the
      rights of conquest. We are told that Valerian, in chains, but
      invested with the Imperial purple, was exposed to the multitude,
      a constant spectacle of fallen greatness; and that whenever the
      Persian monarch mounted on horseback, he placed his foot on the
      neck of a Roman emperor. Notwithstanding all the remonstrances of
      his allies, who repeatedly advised him to remember the
      vicissitudes of fortune, to dread the returning power of Rome,
      and to make his illustrious captive the pledge of peace, not the
      object of insult, Sapor still remained inflexible. When Valerian
      sunk under the weight of shame and grief, his skin, stuffed with
      straw, and formed into the likeness of a human figure, was
      preserved for ages in the most celebrated temple of Persia; a
      more real monument of triumph, than the fancied trophies of brass
      and marble so often erected by Roman vanity. 150 The tale is
      moral and pathetic, but the truth 1501 of it may very fairly be
      called in question. The letters still extant from the princes of
      the East to Sapor are manifest forgeries; 151 nor is it natural
      to suppose that a jealous monarch should, even in the person of a
      rival, thus publicly degrade the majesty of kings. Whatever
      treatment the unfortunate Valerian might experience in Persia, it
      is at least certain that the only emperor of Rome who had ever
      fallen into the hands of the enemy, languished away his life in
      hopeless captivity.


      150 (return) [ The Pagan writers lament, the Christian insult,
      the misfortunes of Valerian. Their various testimonies are
      accurately collected by Tillemont, tom. iii. p. 739, &c. So
      little has been preserved of eastern history before Mahomet, that
      the modern Persians are totally ignorant of the victory Sapor, an
      event so glorious to their nation. See Bibliotheque Orientale. *
      Note: Malcolm appears to write from Persian authorities, i.
      76.—M.]


      1501 (return) [ Yet Gibbon himself records a speech of the
      emperor Galerius, which alludes to the cruelties exercised
      against the living, and the indignities to which they exposed the
      dead Valerian, vol. ii. ch. 13. Respect for the kingly character
      would by no means prevent an eastern monarch from ratifying his
      pride and his vengeance on a fallen foe.—M.]


      151 (return) [ One of these epistles is from Artavasdes, king of
      Armenia; since Armenia was then a province of Persia, the king,
      the kingdom, and the epistle must be fictitious.]


      The emperor Gallienus, who had long supported with impatience the
      censorial severity of his father and colleague, received the
      intelligence of his misfortunes with secret pleasure and avowed
      indifference. “I knew that my father was a mortal,” said he; “and
      since he has acted as it becomes a brave man, I am satisfied.”
      Whilst Rome lamented the fate of her sovereign, the savage
      coldness of his son was extolled by the servile courtiers as the
      perfect firmness of a hero and a stoic. 152 It is difficult to
      paint the light, the various, the inconstant character of
      Gallienus, which he displayed without constraint, as soon as he
      became sole possessor of the empire. In every art that he
      attempted, his lively genius enabled him to succeed; and as his
      genius was destitute of judgment, he attempted every art, except
      the important ones of war and government. He was a master of
      several curious, but useless sciences, a ready orator, an elegant
      poet, 153 a skilful gardener, an excellent cook, and most
      contemptible prince. When the great emergencies of the state
      required his presence and attention, he was engaged in
      conversation with the philosopher Plotinus, 154 wasting his time
      in trifling or licentious pleasures, preparing his initiation to
      the Grecian mysteries, or soliciting a place in the Areopagus of
      Athens. His profuse magnificence insulted the general poverty;
      the solemn ridicule of his triumphs impressed a deeper sense of
      the public disgrace. 155 The repeated intelligence of invasions,
      defeats, and rebellions, he received with a careless smile; and
      singling out, with affected contempt, some particular production
      of the lost province, he carelessly asked, whether Rome must be
      ruined, unless it was supplied with linen from Egypt, and arras
      cloth from Gaul. There were, however, a few short moments in the
      life of Gallienus, when, exasperated by some recent injury, he
      suddenly appeared the intrepid soldier and the cruel tyrant;
      till, satiated with blood, or fatigued by resistance, he
      insensibly sunk into the natural mildness and indolence of his
      character. 156


      152 (return) [ See his life in the Augustan History.]


      153 (return) [ There is still extant a very pretty Epithalamium,
      composed by Gallienus for the nuptials of his nephews:—“Ite ait,
      O juvenes, pariter sudate medullis Omnibus, inter vos: non
      murmura vestra columbæ, Brachia non hederæ, non vincant oscula
      conchæ.”]


      154 (return) [ He was on the point of giving Plotinus a ruined
      city of Campania to try the experiment of realizing Plato’s
      Republic. See the Life of Plotinus, by Porphyry, in Fabricius’s
      Biblioth. Græc. l. iv.]


      155 (return) [A medal which bears the head of Gallienus has
      perplexed the antiquarians by its legend and reverse; the former
      Gallienæ Augustæ, the latter Ubique Pax. M. Spanheim supposes
      that the coin was struck by some of the enemies of Gallienus, and
      was designed as a severe satire on that effeminate prince. But as
      the use of irony may seem unworthy of the gravity of the Roman
      mint, M. de Vallemont has deduced from a passage of Trebellius
      Pollio (Hist. Aug. p. 198) an ingenious and natural solution.
      Galliena was first cousin to the emperor. By delivering Africa
      from the usurper Celsus, she deserved the title of Augusta. On a
      medal in the French king’s collection, we read a similar
      inscription of Faustina Augusta round the head of Marcus
      Aurelius. With regard to the Ubique Pax, it is easily explained
      by the vanity of Gallienus, who seized, perhaps, the occasion of
      some momentary calm. See Nouvelles de la Republique des Lettres,
      Janvier, 1700, p. 21—34.]


      156 (return) [ This singular character has, I believe, been
      fairly transmitted to us. The reign of his immediate successor
      was short and busy; and the historians who wrote before the
      elevation of the family of Constantine could not have the most
      remote interest to misrepresent the character of Gallienus.]


      At the time when the reins of government were held with so loose
      a hand, it is not surprising that a crowd of usurpers should
      start up in every province of the empire against the son of
      Valerian. It was probably some ingenious fancy, of comparing the
      thirty tyrants of Rome with the thirty tyrants of Athens, that
      induced the writers of the Augustan History to select that
      celebrated number, which has been gradually received into a
      popular appellation. 157 But in every light the parallel is idle
      and defective. What resemblance can we discover between a council
      of thirty persons, the united oppressors of a single city, and an
      uncertain list of independent rivals, who rose and fell in
      irregular succession through the extent of a vast empire? Nor can
      the number of thirty be completed, unless we include in the
      account the women and children who were honored with the Imperial
      title. The reign of Gallienus, distracted as it was, produced
      only nineteen pretenders to the throne: Cyriades, Macrianus,
      Balista, Odenathus, and Zenobia, in the East; in Gaul, and the
      western provinces, Posthumus, Lollianus, Victorinus, and his
      mother Victoria, Marius, and Tetricus; in Illyricum and the
      confines of the Danube, Ingenuus, Regillianus, and Aureolus; in
      Pontus, 158 Saturninus; in Isauria, Trebellianus; Piso in
      Thessaly; Valens in Achaia; Æmilianus in Egypt; and Celsus in
      Africa. 1581 To illustrate the obscure monuments of the life and
      death of each individual, would prove a laborious task, alike
      barren of instruction and of amusement. We may content ourselves
      with investigating some general characters, that most strongly
      mark the condition of the times, and the manners of the men,
      their pretensions, their motives, their fate, and the destructive
      consequences of their usurpation. 159


      157 (return) [ Pollio expresses the most minute anxiety to
      complete the number. * Note: Compare a dissertation of Manso on
      the thirty tyrants at the end of his Leben Constantius des
      Grossen. Breslau, 1817.—M.]


      158 (return) [ The place of his reign is somewhat doubtful; but
      there was a tyrant in Pontus, and we are acquainted with the seat
      of all the others.]


      1581 (return) [ Captain Smyth, in his “Catalogue of Medals,” p.
      307, substitutes two new names to make up the number of nineteen,
      for those of Odenathus and Zenobia. He subjoins this list:—1. 2.
      3. Of those whose coins Those whose coins Those of whom no are
      undoubtedly true. are suspected. coins are known. Posthumus.
      Cyriades. Valens. Lælianus, (Lollianus, G.) Ingenuus. Balista
      Victorinus Celsus. Saturninus. Marius. Piso Frugi. Trebellianus.
      Tetricus. —M. 1815 Macrianus. Quietus. Regalianus (Regillianus,
      G.) Alex. Æmilianus. Aureolus. Sulpicius Antoninus]


      159 (return) [ Tillemont, tom. iii. p. 1163, reckons them
      somewhat differently.]


      It is sufficiently known, that the odious appellation of _Tyrant_
      was often employed by the ancients to express the illegal seizure
      of supreme power, without any reference to the abuse of it.
      Several of the pretenders, who raised the standard of rebellion
      against the emperor Gallienus, were shining models of virtue, and
      almost all possessed a considerable share of vigor and ability.
      Their merit had recommended them to the favor of Valerian, and
      gradually promoted them to the most important commands of the
      empire. The generals, who assumed the title of Augustus, were
      either respected by their troops for their able conduct and
      severe discipline, or admired for valor and success in war, or
      beloved for frankness and generosity. The field of victory was
      often the scene of their election; and even the armorer Marius,
      the most contemptible of all the candidates for the purple, was
      distinguished, however, by intrepid courage, matchless strength,
      and blunt honesty. 160 His mean and recent trade cast, indeed, an
      air of ridicule on his elevation; 1601 but his birth could not be
      more obscure than was that of the greater part of his rivals, who
      were born of peasants, and enlisted in the army as private
      soldiers. In times of confusion every active genius finds the
      place assigned him by nature: in a general state of war military
      merit is the road to glory and to greatness. Of the nineteen
      tyrants Tetricus only was a senator; Piso alone was a noble. The
      blood of Numa, through twenty-eight successive generations, ran
      in the veins of Calphurnius Piso, 161 who, by female alliances,
      claimed a right of exhibiting, in his house, the images of
      Crassus and of the great Pompey. 162 His ancestors had been
      repeatedly dignified with all the honors which the commonwealth
      could bestow; and of all the ancient families of Rome, the
      Calphurnian alone had survived the tyranny of the Cæsars. The
      personal qualities of Piso added new lustre to his race. The
      usurper Valens, by whose order he was killed, confessed, with
      deep remorse, that even an enemy ought to have respected the
      sanctity of Piso; and although he died in arms against Gallienus,
      the senate, with the emperor’s generous permission, decreed the
      triumphal ornaments to the memory of so virtuous a rebel. 163


      160 (return) [ See the speech of Marius in the Augustan History,
      p. 197. The accidental identity of names was the only
      circumstance that could tempt Pollio to imitate Sallust.]


      1601 (return) [ Marius was killed by a soldier, who had formerly
      served as a workman in his shop, and who exclaimed, as he struck,
      “Behold the sword which thyself hast forged.” Trob vita.—G.]


      161 (return) [ “Vos, O Pompilius sanguis!” is Horace’s address to
      the Pisos See Art. Poet. v. 292, with Dacier’s and Sanadon’s
      notes.]


      162 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xv. 48. Hist. i. 15. In the former
      of these passages we may venture to change paterna into materna.
      In every generation from Augustus to Alexander Severus, one or
      more Pisos appear as consuls. A Piso was deemed worthy of the
      throne by Augustus, (Tacit. Annal. i. 13;) a second headed a
      formidable conspiracy against Nero; and a third was adopted, and
      declared Cæsar, by Galba.]


      163 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 195. The senate, in a moment of
      enthusiasm, seems to have presumed on the approbation of
      Gallienus.]


      The lieutenants of Valerian were grateful to the father, whom
      they esteemed. They disdained to serve the luxurious indolence of
      his unworthy son. The throne of the Roman world was unsupported
      by any principle of loyalty; and treason against such a prince
      might easily be considered as patriotism to the state. Yet if we
      examine with candor the conduct of these usurpers, it will
      appear, that they were much oftener driven into rebellion by
      their fears, than urged to it by their ambition. They dreaded the
      cruel suspicions of Gallienus; they equally dreaded the
      capricious violence of their troops. If the dangerous favor of
      the army had imprudently declared them deserving of the purple,
      they were marked for sure destruction; and even prudence would
      counsel them to secure a short enjoyment of empire, and rather to
      try the fortune of war than to expect the hand of an executioner.


      When the clamor of the soldiers invested the reluctant victims
      with the ensigns of sovereign authority, they sometimes mourned
      in secret their approaching fate. “You have lost,” said
      Saturninus, on the day of his elevation, “you have lost a useful
      commander, and you have made a very wretched emperor.” 164


      164 (return) [ Hist. August p. 196.]


      The apprehensions of Saturninus were justified by the repeated
      experience of revolutions. Of the nineteen tyrants who started up
      under the reign of Gallienus, there was not one who enjoyed a
      life of peace, or a natural death. As soon as they were invested
      with the bloody purple, they inspired their adherents with the
      same fears and ambition which had occasioned their own revolt.
      Encompassed with domestic conspiracy, military sedition, and
      civil war, they trembled on the edge of precipices, in which,
      after a longer or shorter term of anxiety, they were inevitably
      lost. These precarious monarchs received, however, such honors as
      the flattery of their respective armies and provinces could
      bestow; but their claim, founded on rebellion, could never obtain
      the sanction of law or history. Italy, Rome, and the senate,
      constantly adhered to the cause of Gallienus, and he alone was
      considered as the sovereign of the empire. That prince
      condescended, indeed, to acknowledge the victorious arms of
      Odenathus, who deserved the honorable distinction, by the
      respectful conduct which he always maintained towards the son of
      Valerian. With the general applause of the Romans, and the
      consent of Gallienus, the senate conferred the title of Augustus
      on the brave Palmyrenian; and seemed to intrust him with the
      government of the East, which he already possessed, in so
      independent a manner, that, like a private succession, he
      bequeathed it to his illustrious widow, Zenobia. 165


      165 (return) [ The association of the brave Palmyrenian was the
      most popular act of the whole reign of Gallienus. Hist. August.
      p. 180.]


      The rapid and perpetual transitions from the cottage to the
      throne, and from the throne to the grave, might have amused an
      indifferent philosopher; were it possible for a philosopher to
      remain indifferent amidst the general calamities of human kind.
      The election of these precarious emperors, their power and their
      death, were equally destructive to their subjects and adherents.
      The price of their fatal elevation was instantly discharged to
      the troops by an immense donative, drawn from the bowels of the
      exhausted people. However virtuous was their character, however
      pure their intentions, they found themselves reduced to the hard
      necessity of supporting their usurpation by frequent acts of
      rapine and cruelty. When they fell, they involved armies and
      provinces in their fall. There is still extant a most savage
      mandate from Gallienus to one of his ministers, after the
      suppression of Ingenuus, who had assumed the purple in Illyricum.


      “It is not enough,” says that soft but inhuman prince, “that you
      exterminate such as have appeared in arms; the chance of battle
      might have served me as effectually. The male sex of every age
      must be extirpated; provided that, in the execution of the
      children and old men, you can contrive means to save our
      reputation. Let every one die who has dropped an expression, who
      has entertained a thought against me, against _me_, the son of
      Valerian, the father and brother of so many princes. 166 Remember
      that Ingenuus was made emperor: tear, kill, hew in pieces. I
      write to you with my own hand, and would inspire you with my own
      feelings.” 167 Whilst the public forces of the state were
      dissipated in private quarrels, the defenceless provinces lay
      exposed to every invader. The bravest usurpers were compelled, by
      the perplexity of their situation, to conclude ignominious
      treaties with the common enemy, to purchase with oppressive
      tributes the neutrality or services of the Barbarians, and to
      introduce hostile and independent nations into the heart of the
      Roman monarchy. 168


      166 (return) [ Gallienus had given the titles of Cæsar and
      Augustus to his son Saloninus, slain at Cologne by the usurper
      Posthumus. A second son of Gallienus succeeded to the name and
      rank of his elder brother Valerian, the brother of Gallienus, was
      also associated to the empire: several other brothers, sisters,
      nephews, and nieces of the emperor formed a very numerous royal
      family. See Tillemont, tom iii, and M. de Brequigny in the
      Memoires de l’Academie, tom xxxii p. 262.]


      167 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 188.]


      168 (return) [ Regillianus had some bands of Roxolani in his
      service; Posthumus a body of Franks. It was, perhaps, in the
      character of auxiliaries that the latter introduced themselves
      into Spain.]


      Such were the barbarians, and such the tyrants, who, under the
      reigns of Valerian and Gallienus, dismembered the provinces, and
      reduced the empire to the lowest pitch of disgrace and ruin, from
      whence it seemed impossible that it should ever emerge. As far as
      the barrenness of materials would permit, we have attempted to
      trace, with order and perspicuity, the general events of that
      calamitous period. There still remain some particular facts; I.
      The disorders of Sicily; II. The tumults of Alexandria; and, III.
      The rebellion of the Isaurians, which may serve to reflect a
      strong light on the horrid picture.


      I. Whenever numerous troops of banditti, multiplied by success
      and impunity, publicly defy, instead of eluding, the justice of
      their country, we may safely infer that the excessive weakness of
      the country is felt and abused by the lowest ranks of the
      community. The situation of Sicily preserved it from the
      Barbarians; nor could the disarmed province have supported a
      usurper. The sufferings of that once flourishing and still
      fertile island were inflicted by baser hands. A licentious crowd
      of slaves and peasants reigned for a while over the plundered
      country, and renewed the memory of the servile wars of more
      ancient times. 169 Devastations, of which the husbandman was
      either the victim or the accomplice, must have ruined the
      agriculture of Sicily; and as the principal estates were the
      property of the opulent senators of Rome, who often enclosed
      within a farm the territory of an old republic, it is not
      improbable, that this private injury might affect the capital
      more deeply, than all the conquests of the Goths or the Persians.


      169 (return) [ The Augustan History, p. 177. See Diodor. Sicul.
      l. xxxiv.]


      II. The foundation of Alexandria was a noble design, at once
      conceived and executed by the son of Philip. The beautiful and
      regular form of that great city, second only to Rome itself,
      comprehended a circumference of fifteen miles; 170 it was peopled
      by three hundred thousand free inhabitants, besides at least an
      equal number of slaves. 171 The lucrative trade of Arabia and
      India flowed through the port of Alexandria, to the capital and
      provinces of the empire. 1711 Idleness was unknown. Some were
      employed in blowing of glass, others in weaving of linen, others
      again manufacturing the papyrus. Either sex, and every age, was
      engaged in the pursuits of industry, nor did even the blind or
      the lame want occupations suited to their condition. 172 But the
      people of Alexandria, a various mixture of nations, united the
      vanity and inconstancy of the Greeks with the superstition and
      obstinacy of the Egyptians. The most trifling occasion, a
      transient scarcity of flesh or lentils, the neglect of an
      accustomed salutation, a mistake of precedency in the public
      baths, or even a religious dispute, 173 were at any time
      sufficient to kindle a sedition among that vast multitude, whose
      resentments were furious and implacable. 174 After the captivity
      of Valerian and the insolence of his son had relaxed the
      authority of the laws, the Alexandrians abandoned themselves to
      the ungoverned rage of their passions, and their unhappy country
      was the theatre of a civil war, which continued (with a few short
      and suspicious truces) above twelve years. 175 All intercourse
      was cut off between the several quarters of the afflicted city,
      every street was polluted with blood, every building of strength
      converted into a citadel; nor did the tumults subside till a
      considerable part of Alexandria was irretrievably ruined. The
      spacious and magnificent district of Bruchion, 1751 with its
      palaces and musæum, the residence of the kings and philosophers
      of Egypt, is described above a century afterwards, as already
      reduced to its present state of dreary solitude. 176


      170 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. v. 10.]


      171 (return) [ Diodor. Sicul. l. xvii. p. 590, edit. Wesseling.]


      1711 (return) [ Berenice, or Myos-Hormos, on the Red Sea,
      received the eastern commodities. From thence they were
      transported to the Nile, and down the Nile to Alexandria.—M.]


      172 (return) [ See a very curious letter of Hadrian, in the
      Augustan History, p. 245.]


      173 (return) [ Such as the sacrilegious murder of a divine cat.
      See Diodor. Sicul. l. i. * Note: The hostility between the Jewish
      and Grecian part of the population afterwards between the two
      former and the Christian, were unfailing causes of tumult,
      sedition, and massacre. In no place were the religious disputes,
      after the establishment of Christianity, more frequent or more
      sanguinary. See Philo. de Legat. Hist. of Jews, ii. 171, iii.
      111, 198. Gibbon, iii c. xxi. viii. c. xlvii.—M.]


      174 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 195. This long and terrible
      sedition was first occasioned by a dispute between a soldier and
      a townsman about a pair of shoes.]


      175 (return) [ Dionysius apud. Euses. Hist. Eccles. vii. p. 21.
      Ammian xxii. 16.]


      1751 (return) [ The Bruchion was a quarter of Alexandria which
      extended along the largest of the two ports, and contained many
      palaces, inhabited by the Ptolemies. D’Anv. Geogr. Anc. iii.
      10.—G.]


      176 (return) [ Scaliger. Animadver. ad Euseb. Chron. p. 258.
      Three dissertations of M. Bonamy, in the Mem. de l’Academie, tom.
      ix.]

III. The obscure rebellion of Trebellianus, who assumed the purple in
Isauria, a petty province of Asia Minor, was attended with strange and
memorable consequences. The pageant of royalty was soon destroyed by an
officer of Gallienus; but his followers, despairing of mercy, resolved
to shake off their allegiance, not only to the emperor, but to the
empire, and suddenly returned to the savage manners from which they had
never perfectly been reclaimed. Their craggy rocks, a branch of the
wide-extended Taurus, protected their inaccessible retreat. The tillage
of some fertile valleys 177 supplied them with necessaries, and a habit
of rapine with the luxuries of life. In the heart of the Roman
monarchy, the Isaurians long continued a nation of wild barbarians.
Succeeding princes, unable to reduce them to obedience, either by arms
or policy, were compelled to acknowledge their weakness, by surrounding
the hostile and independent spot with a strong chain of fortifications,
178 which often proved insufficient to restrain the incursions of these
domestic foes. The Isaurians, gradually extending their territory to
the sea-coast, subdued the western and mountainous part of Cilicia,
formerly the nest of those daring pirates, against whom the republic
had once been obliged to exert its utmost force, under the conduct of
the great Pompey. 179


      177 (return) [ Strabo, l. xiii. p. 569.]


      178 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 197.]


      179 (return) [ See Cellarius, Geogr Antiq. tom. ii. p. 137, upon
      the limits of Isauria.]


      Our habits of thinking so fondly connect the order of the
      universe with the fate of man, that this gloomy period of history
      has been decorated with inundations, earthquakes, uncommon
      meteors, preternatural darkness, and a crowd of prodigies
      fictitious or exaggerated. 180 But a long and general famine was
      a calamity of a more serious kind. It was the inevitable
      consequence of rapine and oppression, which extirpated the
      produce of the present and the hope of future harvests. Famine is
      almost always followed by epidemical diseases, the effect of
      scanty and unwholesome food. Other causes must, however, have
      contributed to the furious plague, which, from the year two
      hundred and fifty to the year two hundred and sixty-five, raged
      without interruption in every province, every city, and almost
      every family, of the Roman empire. During some time five thousand
      persons died daily in Rome; and many towns, that had escaped the
      hands of the Barbarians, were entirely depopulated. 181b


      180 (return) [ Hist August p 177.]


      181b (return) [ Hist. August. p. 177. Zosimus, l. i. p. 24.
      Zonaras, l. xii. p. 623. Euseb. Chronicon. Victor in Epitom.
      Victor in Cæsar. Eutropius, ix. 5. Orosius, vii. 21.]


      We have the knowledge of a very curious circumstance, of some use
      perhaps in the melancholy calculation of human calamities. An
      exact register was kept at Alexandria of all the citizens
      entitled to receive the distribution of corn. It was found, that
      the ancient number of those comprised between the ages of forty
      and seventy, had been equal to the whole sum of claimants, from
      fourteen to fourscore years of age, who remained alive after the
      reign of Gallienus. 182 Applying this authentic fact to the most
      correct tables of mortality, it evidently proves, that above half
      the people of Alexandria had perished; and could we venture to
      extend the analogy to the other provinces, we might suspect, that
      war, pestilence, and famine, had consumed, in a few years, the
      moiety of the human species. 