Chapter XIII: Reign Of Diocletian And His Three Associates.—Part
      I.


The Reign Of Diocletian And His Three Associates, Maximian, Galerius,
And Constantius.—General Reestablishment Of Order And Tranquillity.—The
Persian War, Victory, And Triumph.—The New Form Of
Administration.—Abdication And Retirement Of Diocletian And Maximian.


      As the reign of Diocletian was more illustrious than that of any
      of his predecessors, so was his birth more abject and obscure.
      The strong claims of merit and of violence had frequently
      superseded the ideal prerogatives of nobility; but a distinct
      line of separation was hitherto preserved between the free and
      the servile part of mankind. The parents of Diocletian had been
      slaves in the house of Anulinus, a Roman senator; nor was he
      himself distinguished by any other name than that which he
      derived from a small town in Dalmatia, from whence his mother
      deduced her origin. 1 It is, however, probable that his father
      obtained the freedom of the family, and that he soon acquired an
      office of scribe, which was commonly exercised by persons of his
      condition. 2 Favorable oracles, or rather the consciousness of
      superior merit, prompted his aspiring son to pursue the
      profession of arms and the hopes of fortune; and it would be
      extremely curious to observe the gradation of arts and accidents
      which enabled him in the end to fulfil those oracles, and to
      display that merit to the world. Diocletian was successively
      promoted to the government of Mæsia, the honors of the
      consulship, and the important command of the guards of the
      palace. He distinguished his abilities in the Persian war; and
      after the death of Numerian, the slave, by the confession and
      judgment of his rivals, was declared the most worthy of the
      Imperial throne. The malice of religious zeal, whilst it arraigns
      the savage fierceness of his colleague Maximian, has affected to
      cast suspicions on the personal courage of the emperor
      Diocletian. 3 It would not be easy to persuade us of the
      cowardice of a soldier of fortune, who acquired and preserved the
      esteem of the legions as well as the favor of so many warlike
      princes. Yet even calumny is sagacious enough to discover and to
      attack the most vulnerable part. The valor of Diocletian was
      never found inadequate to his duty, or to the occasion; but he
      appears not to have possessed the daring and generous spirit of a
      hero, who courts danger and fame, disdains artifice, and boldly
      challenges the allegiance of his equals. His abilities were
      useful rather than splendid; a vigorous mind, improved by the
      experience and study of mankind; dexterity and application in
      business; a judicious mixture of liberality and economy, of
      mildness and rigor; profound dissimulation, under the disguise of
      military frankness; steadiness to pursue his ends; flexibility to
      vary his means; and, above all, the great art of submitting his
      own passions, as well as those of others, to the interest of his
      ambition, and of coloring his ambition with the most specious
      pretences of justice and public utility. Like Augustus,
      Diocletian may be considered as the founder of a new empire. Like
      the adopted son of Cæsar, he was distinguished as a statesman
      rather than as a warrior; nor did either of those princes employ
      force, whenever their purpose could be effected by policy.


      1 (return) [ Eutrop. ix. 19. Victor in Epitome. The town seems to
      have been properly called Doclia, from a small tribe of
      Illyrians, (see Cellarius, Geograph. Antiqua, tom. i. p. 393;)
      and the original name of the fortunate slave was probably Docles;
      he first lengthened it to the Grecian harmony of Diocles, and at
      length to the Roman majesty of Diocletianus. He likewise assumed
      the Patrician name of Valerius and it is usually given him by
      Aurelius Victor.]


      2 (return) [ See Dacier on the sixth satire of the second book of
      Horace Cornel. Nepos, ’n Vit. Eumen. c. l.]


      3 (return) [ Lactantius (or whoever was the author of the little
      treatise De Mortibus Persecutorum) accuses Diocletian of timidity
      in two places, c. 7. 8. In chap. 9 he says of him, “erat in omni
      tumultu meticulosu et animi disjectus.”]


      The victory of Diocletian was remarkable for its singular
      mildness. A people accustomed to applaud the clemency of the
      conqueror, if the usual punishments of death, exile, and
      confiscation, were inflicted with any degree of temper and
      equity, beheld, with the most pleasing astonishment, a civil war,
      the flames of which were extinguished in the field of battle.
      Diocletian received into his confidence Aristobulus, the
      principal minister of the house of Carus, respected the lives,
      the fortunes, and the dignity, of his adversaries, and even
      continued in their respective stations the greater number of the
      servants of Carinus. 4 It is not improbable that motives of
      prudence might assist the humanity of the artful Dalmatian; of
      these servants, many had purchased his favor by secret treachery;
      in others, he esteemed their grateful fidelity to an unfortunate
      master. The discerning judgment of Aurelian, of Probus, and of
      Carus, had filled the several departments of the state and army
      with officers of approved merit, whose removal would have injured
      the public service, without promoting the interest of his
      successor. Such a conduct, however, displayed to the Roman world
      the fairest prospect of the new reign, and the emperor affected
      to confirm this favorable prepossession, by declaring, that,
      among all the virtues of his predecessors, he was the most
      ambitious of imitating the humane philosophy of Marcus Antoninus.
      5


      4 (return) [ In this encomium, Aurelius Victor seems to convey a
      just, though indirect, censure of the cruelty of Constantius. It
      appears from the Fasti, that Aristobulus remained præfect of the
      city, and that he ended with Diocletian the consulship which he
      had commenced with Carinus.]


      5 (return) [ Aurelius Victor styles Diocletian, “Parentum potius
      quam Dominum.” See Hist. August. p. 30.]


      The first considerable action of his reign seemed to evince his
      sincerity as well as his moderation. After the example of Marcus,
      he gave himself a colleague in the person of Maximian, on whom he
      bestowed at first the title of Cæsar, and afterwards that of
      Augustus. 6 But the motives of his conduct, as well as the object
      of his choice, were of a very different nature from those of his
      admired predecessor. By investing a luxurious youth with the
      honors of the purple, Marcus had discharged a debt of private
      gratitude, at the expense, indeed, of the happiness of the state.
      By associating a friend and a fellow-soldier to the labors of
      government, Diocletian, in a time of public danger, provided for
      the defence both of the East and of the West. Maximian was born a
      peasant, and, like Aurelian, in the territory of Sirmium.
      Ignorant of letters, 7 careless of laws, the rusticity of his
      appearance and manners still betrayed in the most elevated
      fortune the meanness of his extraction. War was the only art
      which he professed. In a long course of service he had
      distinguished himself on every frontier of the empire; and though
      his military talents were formed to obey rather than to command,
      though, perhaps, he never attained the skill of a consummate
      general, he was capable, by his valor, constancy, and experience,
      of executing the most arduous undertakings. Nor were the vices of
      Maximian less useful to his benefactor. Insensible to pity, and
      fearless of consequences, he was the ready instrument of every
      act of cruelty which the policy of that artful prince might at
      once suggest and disclaim. As soon as a bloody sacrifice had been
      offered to prudence or to revenge, Diocletian, by his seasonable
      intercession, saved the remaining few whom he had never designed
      to punish, gently censured the severity of his stern colleague,
      and enjoyed the comparison of a golden and an iron age, which was
      universally applied to their opposite maxims of government.
      Notwithstanding the difference of their characters, the two
      emperors maintained, on the throne, that friendship which they
      had contracted in a private station. The haughty, turbulent
      spirit of Maximian, so fatal, afterwards, to himself and to the
      public peace, was accustomed to respect the genius of Diocletian,
      and confessed the ascendant of reason over brutal violence. 8
      From a motive either of pride or superstition, the two emperors
      assumed the titles, the one of Jovius, the other of Herculius.
      Whilst the motion of the world (such was the language of their
      venal orators) was maintained by the all-seeing wisdom of
      Jupiter, the invincible arm of Hercules purged the earth from
      monsters and tyrants. 9


      6 (return) [ The question of the time when Maximian received the
      honors of Cæsar and Augustus has divided modern critics, and
      given occasion to a great deal of learned wrangling. I have
      followed M. de Tillemont, (Histoire des Empereurs, tom. iv. p.
      500-505,) who has weighed the several reasons and difficulties
      with his scrupulous accuracy. * Note: Eckbel concurs in this
      view, viii p. 15.—M.]


      7 (return) [ In an oration delivered before him, (Panegyr. Vet.
      ii. 8,) Mamertinus expresses a doubt, whether his hero, in
      imitating the conduct of Hannibal and Scipio, had ever heard of
      their names. From thence we may fairly infer, that Maximian was
      more desirous of being considered as a soldier than as a man of
      letters; and it is in this manner that we can often translate the
      language of flattery into that of truth.]


      8 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 8. Aurelius Victor. As among
      the Panegyrics, we find orations pronounced in praise of
      Maximian, and others which flatter his adversaries at his
      expense, we derive some knowledge from the contrast.]


      9 (return) [ See the second and third Panegyrics, particularly
      iii. 3, 10, 14 but it would be tedious to copy the diffuse and
      affected expressions of their false eloquence. With regard to the
      titles, consult Aurel. Victor Lactantius de M. P. c. 52. Spanheim
      de Usu Numismatum, &c. xii 8.]


      But even the omnipotence of Jovius and Herculius was insufficient
      to sustain the weight of the public administration. The prudence
      of Diocletian discovered that the empire, assailed on every side
      by the barbarians, required on every side the presence of a great
      army, and of an emperor. With this view, he resolved once more to
      divide his unwieldy power, and with the inferior title of
      _Cæsars_, 901 to confer on two generals of approved merit an
      unequal share of the sovereign authority. 10 Galerius, surnamed
      Armentarius, from his original profession of a herdsman, and
      Constantius, who from his pale complexion had acquired the
      denomination of Chlorus, 11 were the two persons invested with
      the second honors of the Imperial purple. In describing the
      country, extraction, and manners of Herculius, we have already
      delineated those of Galerius, who was often, and not improperly,
      styled the younger Maximian, though, in many instances both of
      virtue and ability, he appears to have possessed a manifest
      superiority over the elder. The birth of Constantius was less
      obscure than that of his colleagues. Eutropius, his father, was
      one of the most considerable nobles of Dardania, and his mother
      was the niece of the emperor Claudius. 12 Although the youth of
      Constantius had been spent in arms, he was endowed with a mild
      and amiable disposition, and the popular voice had long since
      acknowledged him worthy of the rank which he at last attained. To
      strengthen the bonds of political, by those of domestic, union,
      each of the emperors assumed the character of a father to one of
      the Cæsars, Diocletian to Galerius, and Maximian to Constantius;
      and each, obliging them to repudiate their former wives, bestowed
      his daughter in marriage or his adopted son. 13 These four
      princes distributed among themselves the wide extent of the Roman
      empire. The defence of Gaul, Spain, 14 and Britain, was intrusted
      to Constantius: Galerius was stationed on the banks of the
      Danube, as the safeguard of the Illyrian provinces. Italy and
      Africa were considered as the department of Maximian; and for his
      peculiar portion, Diocletian reserved Thrace, Egypt, and the rich
      countries of Asia. Every one was sovereign with his own
      jurisdiction; but their united authority extended over the whole
      monarchy, and each of them was prepared to assist his colleagues
      with his counsels or presence. The Cæsars, in their exalted rank,
      revered the majesty of the emperors, and the three younger
      princes invariably acknowledged, by their gratitude and
      obedience, the common parent of their fortunes. The suspicious
      jealousy of power found not any place among them; and the
      singular happiness of their union has been compared to a chorus
      of music, whose harmony was regulated and maintained by the
      skilful hand of the first artist. 15


      901 (return) [ On the relative power of the Augusti and the
      Cæsars, consult a dissertation at the end of Manso’s Leben
      Constantius des Grossen—M.]


      10 (return) [ Aurelius Victor. Victor in Epitome. Eutrop. ix. 22.
      Lactant de M. P. c. 8. Hieronym. in Chron.]


      11 (return) [ It is only among the modern Greeks that Tillemont
      can discover his appellation of Chlorus. Any remarkable degree of
      paleness seems inconsistent with the rubor mentioned in
      Panegyric, v. 19.]


      12 (return) [ Julian, the grandson of Constantius, boasts that
      his family was derived from the warlike Mæsians. Misopogon, p.
      348. The Dardanians dwelt on the edge of Mæsia.]


      13 (return) [ Galerius married Valeria, the daughter of
      Diocletian; if we speak with strictness, Theodora, the wife of
      Constantius, was daughter only to the wife of Maximian. Spanheim,
      Dissertat, xi. 2.]


      14 (return) [ This division agrees with that of the four
      præfectures; yet there is some reason to doubt whether Spain was
      not a province of Maximian. See Tillemont, tom. iv. p. 517. *
      Note: According to Aurelius Victor and other authorities, Thrace
      belonged to the division of Galerius. See Tillemont, iv. 36. But
      the laws of Diocletian are in general dated in Illyria or
      Thrace.—M.]


      15 (return) [ Julian in Cæsarib. p. 315. Spanheim’s notes to the
      French translation, p. 122.]


      This important measure was not carried into execution till about
      six years after the association of Maximian, and that interval of
      time had not been destitute of memorable incidents. But we have
      preferred, for the sake of perspicuity, first to describe the
      more perfect form of Diocletian’s government, and afterwards to
      relate the actions of his reign, following rather the natural
      order of the events, than the dates of a very doubtful
      chronology.


      The first exploit of Maximian, though it is mentioned in a few
      words by our imperfect writers, deserves, from its singularity,
      to be recorded in a history of human manners. He suppressed the
      peasants of Gaul, who, under the appellation of Bagaudæ, 16 had
      risen in a general insurrection; very similar to those which in
      the fourteenth century successively afflicted both France and
      England. 17 It should seem that very many of those institutions,
      referred by an easy solution to the feudal system, are derived
      from the Celtic barbarians. When Cæsar subdued the Gauls, that
      great nation was already divided into three orders of men; the
      clergy, the nobility, and the common people. The first governed
      by superstition, the second by arms, but the third and last was
      not of any weight or account in their public councils. It was
      very natural for the plebeians, oppressed by debt, or
      apprehensive of injuries, to implore the protection of some
      powerful chief, who acquired over their persons and property the
      same absolute right as, among the Greeks and Romans, a master
      exercised over his slaves. 18 The greatest part of the nation was
      gradually reduced into a state of servitude; compelled to
      perpetual labor on the estates of the Gallic nobles, and confined
      to the soil, either by the real weight of fetters, or by the no
      less cruel and forcible restraints of the laws. During the long
      series of troubles which agitated Gaul, from the reign of
      Gallienus to that of Diocletian, the condition of these servile
      peasants was peculiarly miserable; and they experienced at once
      the complicated tyranny of their masters, of the barbarians, of
      the soldiers, and of the officers of the revenue. 19


      16 (return) [ The general name of Bagaudæ (in the signification
      of rebels) continued till the fifth century in Gaul. Some critics
      derive it from a Celtic word Bagad, a tumultuous assembly.
      Scaliger ad Euseb. Du Cange Glossar. (Compare S. Turner,
      Anglo-Sax. History, i. 214.—M.)]


      17 (return) [ Chronique de Froissart, vol. i. c. 182, ii. 73, 79.
      The naivete of his story is lost in our best modern writers.]


      18 (return) [ Cæsar de Bell. Gallic. vi. 13. Orgetorix, the
      Helvetian, could arm for his defence a body of ten thousand
      slaves.]


      19 (return) [ Their oppression and misery are acknowledged by
      Eumenius (Panegyr. vi. 8,) Gallias efferatas injuriis.]


      Their patience was at last provoked into despair. On every side
      they rose in multitudes, armed with rustic weapons, and with
      irresistible fury. The ploughman became a foot soldier, the
      shepherd mounted on horseback, the deserted villages and open
      towns were abandoned to the flames, and the ravages of the
      peasants equalled those of the fiercest barbarians. 20 They
      asserted the natural rights of men, but they asserted those
      rights with the most savage cruelty. The Gallic nobles, justly
      dreading their revenge, either took refuge in the fortified
      cities, or fled from the wild scene of anarchy. The peasants
      reigned without control; and two of their most daring leaders had
      the folly and rashness to assume the Imperial ornaments. 21 Their
      power soon expired at the approach of the legions. The strength
      of union and discipline obtained an easy victory over a
      licentious and divided multitude. 22 A severe retaliation was
      inflicted on the peasants who were found in arms; the affrighted
      remnant returned to their respective habitations, and their
      unsuccessful effort for freedom served only to confirm their
      slavery. So strong and uniform is the current of popular
      passions, that we might almost venture, from very scanty
      materials, to relate the particulars of this war; but we are not
      disposed to believe that the principal leaders, Ælianus and
      Amandus, were Christians, 23 or to insinuate, that the rebellion,
      as it happened in the time of Luther, was occasioned by the abuse
      of those benevolent principles of Christianity, which inculcate
      the natural freedom of mankind.


      20 (return) [ Panegyr. Vet. ii. 4. Aurelius Victor.]


      21 (return) [ Ælianus and Amandus. We have medals coined by them
      Goltzius in Thes. R. A. p. 117, 121.]


      22 (return) [ Levibus proeliis domuit. Eutrop. ix. 20.]


      23 (return) [ The fact rests indeed on very slight authority, a
      life of St. Babolinus, which is probably of the seventh century.
      See Duchesne Scriptores Rer. Francicar. tom. i. p. 662.]


      Maximian had no sooner recovered Gaul from the hands of the
      peasants, than he lost Britain by the usurpation of Carausius.
      Ever since the rash but successful enterprise of the Franks under
      the reign of Probus, their daring countrymen had constructed
      squadrons of light brigantines, in which they incessantly ravaged
      the provinces adjacent to the ocean. 24 To repel their desultory
      incursions, it was found necessary to create a naval power; and
      the judicious measure was prosecuted with prudence and vigor.
      Gessoriacum, or Boulogne, in the straits of the British Channel,
      was chosen by the emperor for the station of the Roman fleet; and
      the command of it was intrusted to Carausius, a Menapian of the
      meanest origin, 25 but who had long signalized his skill as a
      pilot, and his valor as a soldier. The integrity of the new
      admiral corresponded not with his abilities. When the German
      pirates sailed from their own harbors, he connived at their
      passage, but he diligently intercepted their return, and
      appropriated to his own use an ample share of the spoil which
      they had acquired. The wealth of Carausius was, on this occasion,
      very justly considered as an evidence of his guilt; and Maximian
      had already given orders for his death. But the crafty Menapian
      foresaw and prevented the severity of the emperor. By his
      liberality he had attached to his fortunes the fleet which he
      commanded, and secured the barbarians in his interest. From the
      port of Boulogne he sailed over to Britain, persuaded the legion,
      and the auxiliaries which guarded that island, to embrace his
      party, and boldly assuming, with the Imperial purple, the title
      of Augustus, defied the justice and the arms of his injured
      sovereign. 26


      24 (return) [ Aurelius Victor calls them Germans. Eutropius (ix.
      21) gives them the name of Saxons. But Eutropius lived in the
      ensuing century, and seems to use the language of his own times.]


      25 (return) [ The three expressions of Eutropius, Aurelius
      Victor, and Eumenius, “vilissime natus,” “Bataviæ alumnus,” and
      “Menapiæ civis,” give us a very doubtful account of the birth of
      Carausius. Dr. Stukely, however, (Hist. of Carausius, p. 62,)
      chooses to make him a native of St. David’s and a prince of the
      blood royal of Britain. The former idea he had found in Richard
      of Cirencester, p. 44. * Note: The Menapians were settled between
      the Scheldt and the Meuse, is the northern part of Brabant.
      D’Anville, Geogr. Anc. i. 93.—G.]


      26 (return) [ Panegyr. v. 12. Britain at this time was secure,
      and slightly guarded.]


      When Britain was thus dismembered from the empire, its importance
      was sensibly felt, and its loss sincerely lamented. The Romans
      celebrated, and perhaps magnified, the extent of that noble
      island, provided on every side with convenient harbors; the
      temperature of the climate, and the fertility of the soil, alike
      adapted for the production of corn or of vines; the valuable
      minerals with which it abounded; its rich pastures covered with
      innumerable flocks, and its woods free from wild beasts or
      venomous serpents. Above all, they regretted the large amount of
      the revenue of Britain, whilst they confessed, that such a
      province well deserved to become the seat of an independent
      monarchy. 27 During the space of seven years it was possessed by
      Carausius; and fortune continued propitious to a rebellion
      supported with courage and ability. The British emperor defended
      the frontiers of his dominions against the Caledonians of the
      North, invited, from the continent, a great number of skilful
      artists, and displayed, on a variety of coins that are still
      extant, his taste and opulence. Born on the confines of the
      Franks, he courted the friendship of that formidable people, by
      the flattering imitation of their dress and manners. The bravest
      of their youth he enlisted among his land or sea forces; and, in
      return for their useful alliance, he communicated to the
      barbarians the dangerous knowledge of military and naval arts.
      Carausius still preserved the possession of Boulogne and the
      adjacent country. His fleets rode triumphant in the channel,
      commanded the mouths of the Seine and of the Rhine, ravaged the
      coasts of the ocean, and diffused beyond the columns of Hercules
      the terror of his name. Under his command, Britain, destined in a
      future age to obtain the empire of the sea, already assumed its
      natural and respectable station of a maritime power. 28


      27 (return) [ Panegyr. Vet v 11, vii. 9. The orator Eumenius
      wished to exalt the glory of the hero (Constantius) with the
      importance of the conquest. Notwithstanding our laudable
      partiality for our native country, it is difficult to conceive,
      that, in the beginning of the fourth century England deserved all
      these commendations. A century and a half before, it hardly paid
      its own establishment.]


      28 (return) [ As a great number of medals of Carausius are still
      preserved, he is become a very favorite object of antiquarian
      curiosity, and every circumstance of his life and actions has
      been investigated with sagacious accuracy. Dr. Stukely, in
      particular, has devoted a large volume to the British emperor. I
      have used his materials, and rejected most of his fanciful
      conjectures.]


      By seizing the fleet of Boulogne, Carausius had deprived his
      master of the means of pursuit and revenge. And when, after a
      vast expense of time and labor, a new armament was launched into
      the water, 29 the Imperial troops, unaccustomed to that element,
      were easily baffled and defeated by the veteran sailors of the
      usurper. This disappointed effort was soon productive of a treaty
      of peace. Diocletian and his colleague, who justly dreaded the
      enterprising spirit of Carausius, resigned to him the sovereignty
      of Britain, and reluctantly admitted their perfidious servant to
      a participation of the Imperial honors. 30 But the adoption of
      the two Cæsars restored new vigor to the Romans arms; and while
      the Rhine was guarded by the presence of Maximian, his brave
      associate Constantius assumed the conduct of the British war. His
      first enterprise was against the important place of Boulogne. A
      stupendous mole, raised across the entrance of the harbor,
      intercepted all hopes of relief. The town surrendered after an
      obstinate defence; and a considerable part of the naval strength
      of Carausius fell into the hands of the besiegers. During the
      three years which Constantius employed in preparing a fleet
      adequate to the conquest of Britain, he secured the coast of
      Gaul, invaded the country of the Franks, and deprived the usurper
      of the assistance of those powerful allies.


      29 (return) [ When Mamertinus pronounced his first panegyric, the
      naval preparations of Maximian were completed; and the orator
      presaged an assured victory. His silence in the second panegyric
      might alone inform us that the expedition had not succeeded.]


      30 (return) [ Aurelius Victor, Eutropius, and the medals, (Pax
      Augg.) inform us of this temporary reconciliation; though I will
      not presume (as Dr. Stukely has done, Medallic History of
      Carausius, p. 86, &c) to insert the identical articles of the
      treaty.]


      Before the preparations were finished, Constantius received the
      intelligence of the tyrant’s death, and it was considered as a
      sure presage of the approaching victory. The servants of
      Carausius imitated the example of treason which he had given. He
      was murdered by his first minister, Allectus, and the assassin
      succeeded to his power and to his danger. But he possessed not
      equal abilities either to exercise the one or to repel the other.


      He beheld, with anxious terror, the opposite shores of the
      continent already filled with arms, with troops, and with
      vessels; for Constantius had very prudently divided his forces,
      that he might likewise divide the attention and resistance of the
      enemy. The attack was at length made by the principal squadron,
      which, under the command of the præfect Asclepiodatus, an officer
      of distinguished merit, had been assembled in the north of the
      Seine. So imperfect in those times was the art of navigation,
      that orators have celebrated the daring courage of the Romans,
      who ventured to set sail with a side-wind, and on a stormy day.
      The weather proved favorable to their enterprise. Under the cover
      of a thick fog, they escaped the fleet of Allectus, which had
      been stationed off the Isle of Wight to receive them, landed in
      safety on some part of the western coast, and convinced the
      Britons, that a superiority of naval strength will not always
      protect their country from a foreign invasion. Asclepiodatus had
      no sooner disembarked the imperial troops, then he set fire to
      his ships; and, as the expedition proved fortunate, his heroic
      conduct was universally admired. The usurper had posted himself
      near London, to expect the formidable attack of Constantius, who
      commanded in person the fleet of Boulogne; but the descent of a
      new enemy required his immediate presence in the West. He
      performed this long march in so precipitate a manner, that he
      encountered the whole force of the præfect with a small body of
      harassed and disheartened troops. The engagement was soon
      terminated by the total defeat and death of Allectus; a single
      battle, as it has often happened, decided the fate of this great
      island; and when Constantius landed on the shores of Kent, he
      found them covered with obedient subjects. Their acclamations
      were loud and unanimous; and the virtues of the conqueror may
      induce us to believe, that they sincerely rejoiced in a
      revolution, which, after a separation of ten years, restored
      Britain to the body of the Roman empire. 31


      31 (return) [ With regard to the recovery of Britain, we obtain a
      few hints from Aurelius Victor and Eutropius.]


      Chapter XIII: Reign Of Diocletian And His Three Associates.—Part
      II.


      Britain had none but domestic enemies to dread; and as long as
      the governors preserved their fidelity, and the troops their
      discipline, the incursions of the naked savages of Scotland or
      Ireland could never materially affect the safety of the province.


      The peace of the continent, and the defence of the principal
      rivers which bounded the empire, were objects of far greater
      difficulty and importance. The policy of Diocletian, which
      inspired the councils of his associates, provided for the public
      tranquility, by encouraging a spirit of dissension among the
      barbarians, and by strengthening the fortifications of the Roman
      limit. In the East he fixed a line of camps from Egypt to the
      Persian dominions, and for every camp, he instituted an adequate
      number of stationary troops, commanded by their respective
      officers, and supplied with every kind of arms, from the new
      arsenals which he had formed at Antioch, Emesa, and Damascus. 32
      Nor was the precaution of the emperor less watchful against the
      well-known valor of the barbarians of Europe. From the mouth of
      the Rhine to that of the Danube, the ancient camps, towns, and
      citidels, were diligently reëstablished, and, in the most exposed
      places, new ones were skilfully constructed: the strictest
      vigilance was introduced among the garrisons of the frontier, and
      every expedient was practised that could render the long chain of
      fortifications firm and impenetrable. 33 A barrier so respectable
      was seldom violated, and the barbarians often turned against each
      other their disappointed rage. The Goths, the Vandals, the
      Gepidæ, the Burgundians, the Alemanni, wasted each other’s
      strength by destructive hostilities: and whosoever vanquished,
      they vanquished the enemies of Rome. The subjects of Diocletian
      enjoyed the bloody spectacle, and congratulated each other, that
      the mischiefs of civil war were now experienced only by the
      barbarians. 34


      32 (return) [ John Malala, in Chron, Antiochen. tom. i. p. 408,
      409.]


      33 (return) [ Zosim. l. i. p. 3. That partial historian seems to
      celebrate the vigilance of Diocletian with a design of exposing
      the negligence of Constantine; we may, however, listen to an
      orator: “Nam quid ego alarum et cohortium castra percenseam, toto
      Rheni et Istri et Euphraus limite restituta.” Panegyr. Vet. iv.
      18.]


      34 (return) [ Ruunt omnes in sanguinem suum populi, quibus ron
      contigilesse Romanis, obstinatæque feritatis poenas nunc sponte
      persolvunt. Panegyr. Vet. iii. 16. Mamertinus illustrates the
      fact by the example of almost all the nations in the world.]


      Notwithstanding the policy of Diocletian, it was impossible to
      maintain an equal and undisturbed tranquillity during a reign of
      twenty years, and along a frontier of many hundred miles.
      Sometimes the barbarians suspended their domestic animosities,
      and the relaxed vigilance of the garrisons sometimes gave a
      passage to their strength or dexterity. Whenever the provinces
      were invaded, Diocletian conducted himself with that calm dignity
      which he always affected or possessed; reserved his presence for
      such occasions as were worthy of his interposition, never exposed
      his person or reputation to any unnecessary danger, insured his
      success by every means that prudence could suggest, and
      displayed, with ostentation, the consequences of his victory. In
      wars of a more difficult nature, and more doubtful event, he
      employed the rough valor of Maximian; and that faithful soldier
      was content to ascribe his own victories to the wise counsels and
      auspicious influence of his benefactor. But after the adoption of
      the two Cæsars, the emperors themselves, retiring to a less
      laborious scene of action, devolved on their adopted sons the
      defence of the Danube and of the Rhine. The vigilant Galerius was
      never reduced to the necessity of vanquishing an army of
      barbarians on the Roman territory. 35 The brave and active
      Constantius delivered Gaul from a very furious inroad of the
      Alemanni; and his victories of Langres and Vindonissa appear to
      have been actions of considerable danger and merit. As he
      traversed the open country with a feeble guard, he was
      encompassed on a sudden by the superior multitude of the enemy.
      He retreated with difficulty towards Langres; but, in the general
      consternation, the citizens refused to open their gates, and the
      wounded prince was drawn up the wall by the means of a rope. But,
      on the news of his distress, the Roman troops hastened from all
      sides to his relief, and before the evening he had satisfied his
      honor and revenge by the slaughter of six thousand Alemanni. 36
      From the monuments of those times, the obscure traces of several
      other victories over the barbarians of Sarmatia and Germany might
      possibly be collected; but the tedious search would not be
      rewarded either with amusement or with instruction.


      35 (return) [ He complained, though not with the strictest truth,
      “Jam fluxisse annos quindecim in quibus, in Illyrico, ad ripam
      Danubii relegatus cum gentibus barbaris luctaret.” Lactant. de M.
      P. c. 18.]


      36 (return) [ In the Greek text of Eusebius, we read six
      thousand, a number which I have preferred to the sixty thousand
      of Jerome, Orosius Eutropius, and his Greek translator Pæanius.]


      The conduct which the emperor Probus had adopted in the disposal
      of the vanquished was imitated by Diocletian and his associates.
      The captive barbarians, exchanging death for slavery, were
      distributed among the provincials, and assigned to those
      districts (in Gaul, the territories of Amiens, Beauvais, Cambray,
      Treves, Langres, and Troyes, are particularly specified) 37 which
      had been depopulated by the calamities of war. They were usefully
      employed as shepherds and husbandmen, but were denied the
      exercise of arms, except when it was found expedient to enroll
      them in the military service. Nor did the emperors refuse the
      property of lands, with a less servile tenure, to such of the
      barbarians as solicited the protection of Rome. They granted a
      settlement to several colonies of the Carpi, the Bastarnæ, and
      the Sarmatians; and, by a dangerous indulgence, permitted them in
      some measure to retain their national manners and independence.
      38 Among the provincials, it was a subject of flattering
      exultation, that the barbarian, so lately an object of terror,
      now cultivated their lands, drove their cattle to the neighboring
      fair, and contributed by his labor to the public plenty. They
      congratulated their masters on the powerful accession of subjects
      and soldiers; but they forgot to observe, that multitudes of
      secret enemies, insolent from favor, or desperate from
      oppression, were introduced into the heart of the empire. 39


      37 (return) [ Panegyr. Vet. vii. 21.]


      38 (return) [ There was a settlement of the Sarmatians in the
      neighborhood of Treves, which seems to have been deserted by
      those lazy barbarians. Ausonius speaks of them in his Mosella:——
      “Unde iter ingrediens nemorosa per avia solum, Et nulla humani
      spectans vestigia cultus; ........ Arvaque Sauromatum nuper
      metata colonis.”]


      39 (return) [ There was a town of the Carpi in the Lower Mæsia.
      See the rhetorical exultation of Eumenius.]


      While the Cæsars exercised their valor on the banks of the Rhine
      and Danube, the presence of the emperors was required on the
      southern confines of the Roman world. From the Nile to Mount
      Atlas, Africa was in arms. A confederacy of five Moorish nations
      issued from their deserts to invade the peaceful provinces. 40
      Julian had assumed the purple at Carthage. 41 Achilleus at
      Alexandria, and even the Blemmyes, renewed, or rather continued,
      their incursions into the Upper Egypt. Scarcely any circumstances
      have been preserved of the exploits of Maximian in the western
      parts of Africa; but it appears, by the event, that the progress
      of his arms was rapid and decisive, that he vanquished the
      fiercest barbarians of Mauritania, and that he removed them from
      the mountains, whose inaccessible strength had inspired their
      inhabitants with a lawless confidence, and habituated them to a
      life of rapine and violence. 42 Diocletian, on his side, opened
      the campaign in Egypt by the siege of Alexandria, cut off the
      aqueducts which conveyed the waters of the Nile into every
      quarter of that immense city, 43 and rendering his camp
      impregnable to the sallies of the besieged multitude, he pushed
      his reiterated attacks with caution and vigor. After a siege of
      eight months, Alexandria, wasted by the sword and by fire,
      implored the clemency of the conqueror, but it experienced the
      full extent of his severity. Many thousands of the citizens
      perished in a promiscuous slaughter, and there were few obnoxious
      persons in Egypt who escaped a sentence either of death or at
      least of exile. 44 The fate of Busiris and of Coptos was still
      more melancholy than that of Alexandria: those proud cities, the
      former distinguished by its antiquity, the latter enriched by the
      passage of the Indian trade, were utterly destroyed by the arms
      and by the severe order of Diocletian. 45 The character of the
      Egyptian nation, insensible to kindness, but extremely
      susceptible of fear, could alone justify this excessive rigor.
      The seditions of Alexandria had often affected the tranquillity
      and subsistence of Rome itself. Since the usurpation of Firmus,
      the province of Upper Egypt, incessantly relapsing into
      rebellion, had embraced the alliance of the savages of Æthiopia.
      The number of the Blemmyes, scattered between the Island of Meroe
      and the Red Sea, was very inconsiderable, their disposition was
      unwarlike, their weapons rude and inoffensive. 46 Yet in the
      public disorders, these barbarians, whom antiquity, shocked with
      the deformity of their figure, had almost excluded from the human
      species, presumed to rank themselves among the enemies of Rome.
      47 Such had been the unworthy allies of the Egyptians; and while
      the attention of the state was engaged in more serious wars,
      their vexations inroads might again harass the repose of the
      province. With a view of opposing to the Blemmyes a suitable
      adversary, Diocletian persuaded the Nobatæ, or people of Nubia,
      to remove from their ancient habitations in the deserts of Libya,
      and resigned to them an extensive but unprofitable territory
      above Syene and the cataracts of the Nile, with the stipulation,
      that they should ever respect and guard the frontier of the
      empire. The treaty long subsisted; and till the establishment of
      Christianity introduced stricter notions of religious worship, it
      was annually ratified by a solemn sacrifice in the isle of
      Elephantine, in which the Romans, as well as the barbarians,
      adored the same visible or invisible powers of the universe. 48


      40 (return) [ Scaliger (Animadvers. ad Euseb. p. 243) decides, in
      his usual manner, that the Quinque gentiani, or five African
      nations, were the five great cities, the Pentapolis of the
      inoffensive province of Cyrene.]


      41 (return) [ After his defeat, Julian stabbed himself with a
      dagger, and immediately leaped into the flames. Victor in
      Epitome.]


      42 (return) [ Tu ferocissimos Mauritaniæ populos inaccessis
      montium jugis et naturali munitione fidentes, expugnasti,
      recepisti, transtulisti. Panegyr Vet. vi. 8.]


      43 (return) [ See the description of Alexandria, in Hirtius de
      Bel. Alexandrin c. 5.]


      44 (return) [ Eutrop. ix. 24. Orosius, vii. 25. John Malala in
      Chron. Antioch. p. 409, 410. Yet Eumenius assures us, that Egypt
      was pacified by the clemency of Diocletian.]


      45 (return) [ Eusebius (in Chron.) places their destruction
      several years sooner and at a time when Egypt itself was in a
      state of rebellion against the Romans.]


      46 (return) [ Strabo, l. xvii. p. 172. Pomponius Mela, l. i. c.
      4. His words are curious: “Intra, si credere libet vix, homines
      magisque semiferi Ægipanes, et Blemmyes, et Satyri.”]


      47 (return) [ Ausus sese inserere fortunæ et provocare arma
      Romana.]


      48 (return) [ See Procopius de Bell. Persic. l. i. c. 19. Note:
      Compare, on the epoch of the final extirpation of the rites of
      Paganism from the Isle of Philæ, (Elephantine,) which subsisted
      till the edict of Theodosius, in the sixth century, a
      dissertation of M. Letronne, on certain Greek inscriptions. The
      dissertation contains some very interesting observations on the
      conduct and policy of Diocletian in Egypt. Mater pour l’Hist. du
      Christianisme en Egypte, Nubie et Abyssinie, Paris 1817—M.]


      At the same time that Diocletian chastised the past crimes of the
      Egyptians, he provided for their future safety and happiness by
      many wise regulations, which were confirmed and enforced under
      the succeeding reigns. 49 One very remarkable edict which he
      published, instead of being condemned as the effect of jealous
      tyranny, deserves to be applauded as an act of prudence and
      humanity. He caused a diligent inquiry to be made “for all the
      ancient books which treated of the admirable art of making gold
      and silver, and without pity, committed them to the flames;
      apprehensive, as we are assumed, lest the opulence of the
      Egyptians should inspire them with confidence to rebel against
      the empire.” 50 But if Diocletian had been convinced of the
      reality of that valuable art, far from extinguishing the memory,
      he would have converted the operation of it to the benefit of the
      public revenue. It is much more likely, that his good sense
      discovered to him the folly of such magnificent pretensions, and
      that he was desirous of preserving the reason and fortunes of his
      subjects from the mischievous pursuit. It may be remarked, that
      these ancient books, so liberally ascribed to Pythagoras, to
      Solomon, or to Hermes, were the pious frauds of more recent
      adepts. The Greeks were inattentive either to the use or to the
      abuse of chemistry. In that immense register, where Pliny has
      deposited the discoveries, the arts, and the errors of mankind,
      there is not the least mention of the transmutation of metals;
      and the persecution of Diocletian is the first authentic event in
      the history of alchemy. The conquest of Egypt by the Arabs
      diffused that vain science over the globe. Congenial to the
      avarice of the human heart, it was studied in China as in Europe,
      with equal eagerness, and with equal success. The darkness of the
      middle ages insured a favorable reception to every tale of
      wonder, and the revival of learning gave new vigor to hope, and
      suggested more specious arts of deception. Philosophy, with the
      aid of experience, has at length banished the study of alchemy;
      and the present age, however desirous of riches, is content to
      seek them by the humbler means of commerce and industry. 51


      49 (return) [ He fixed the public allowance of corn, for the
      people of Alexandria, at two millions of medimni; about four
      hundred thousand quarters. Chron. Paschal. p. 276 Procop. Hist.
      Arcan. c. 26.]


      50 (return) [ John Antioch, in Excerp. Valesian. p. 834. Suidas
      in Diocletian.]


      51 (return) [ See a short history and confutation of Alchemy, in
      the works of that philosophical compiler, La Mothe le Vayer, tom.
      i. p. 32—353.]


      The reduction of Egypt was immediately followed by the Persian
      war. It was reserved for the reign of Diocletian to vanquish that
      powerful nation, and to extort a confession from the successors
      of Artaxerxes, of the superior majesty of the Roman empire.


      We have observed, under the reign of Valerian, that Armenia was
      subdued by the perfidy and the arms of the Persians, and that,
      after the assassination of Chosroes, his son Tiridates, the
      infant heir of the monarchy, was saved by the fidelity of his
      friends, and educated under the protection of the emperors.
      Tiridates derived from his exile such advantages as he could
      never have obtained on the throne of Armenia; the early knowledge
      of adversity, of mankind, and of the Roman discipline. He
      signalized his youth by deeds of valor, and displayed a matchless
      dexterity, as well as strength, in every martial exercise, and
      even in the less honorable contests of the Olympian games. 52
      Those qualities were more nobly exerted in the defence of his
      benefactor Licinius. 53 That officer, in the sedition which
      occasioned the death of Probus, was exposed to the most imminent
      danger, and the enraged soldiers were forcing their way into his
      tent, when they were checked by the single arm of the Armenian
      prince. The gratitude of Tiridates contributed soon afterwards to
      his restoration. Licinius was in every station the friend and
      companion of Galerius, and the merit of Galerius, long before he
      was raised to the dignity of Cæsar, had been known and esteemed
      by Diocletian. In the third year of that emperor’s reign
      Tiridates was invested with the kingdom of Armenia. The justice
      of the measure was not less evident than its expediency. It was
      time to rescue from the usurpation of the Persian monarch an
      important territory, which, since the reign of Nero, had been
      always granted under the protection of the empire to a younger
      branch of the house of Arsaces. 54


      52 (return) [ See the education and strength of Tiridates in the
      Armenian history of Moses of Chorene, l. ii. c. 76. He could
      seize two wild bulls by the horns, and break them off with his
      hands.]


      53 (return) [ If we give credit to the younger Victor, who
      supposes that in the year 323 Licinius was only sixty years of
      age, he could scarcely be the same person as the patron of
      Tiridates; but we know from much better authority, (Euseb. Hist.
      Ecclesiast. l. x. c. 8,) that Licinius was at that time in the
      last period of old age: sixteen years before, he is represented
      with gray hairs, and as the contemporary of Galerius. See
      Lactant. c. 32. Licinius was probably born about the year 250.]


      54 (return) [ See the sixty-second and sixty-third books of Dion
      Cassius.]


      When Tiridates appeared on the frontiers of Armenia, he was
      received with an unfeigned transport of joy and loyalty. During
      twenty-six years, the country had experienced the real and
      imaginary hardships of a foreign yoke. The Persian monarchs
      adorned their new conquest with magnificent buildings; but those
      monuments had been erected at the expense of the people, and were
      abhorred as badges of slavery. The apprehension of a revolt had
      inspired the most rigorous precautions: oppression had been
      aggravated by insult, and the consciousness of the public hatred
      had been productive of every measure that could render it still
      more implacable. We have already remarked the intolerant spirit
      of the Magian religion. The statues of the deified kings of
      Armenia, and the sacred images of the sun and moon, were broke in
      pieces by the zeal of the conqueror; and the perpetual fire of
      Ormuzd was kindled and preserved upon an altar erected on the
      summit of Mount Bagavan. 55 It was natural, that a people
      exasperated by so many injuries, should arm with zeal in the
      cause of their independence, their religion, and their hereditary
      sovereign. The torrent bore down every obstacle, and the Persian
      garrisons retreated before its fury. The nobles of Armenia flew
      to the standard of Tiridates, all alleging their past merit,
      offering their future service, and soliciting from the new king
      those honors and rewards from which they had been excluded with
      disdain under the foreign government. 56 The command of the army
      was bestowed on Artavasdes, whose father had saved the infancy of
      Tiridates, and whose family had been massacred for that generous
      action. The brother of Artavasdes obtained the government of a
      province. One of the first military dignities was conferred on
      the satrap Otas, a man of singular temperance and fortitude, who
      presented to the king his sister 57 and a considerable treasure,
      both of which, in a sequestered fortress, Otas had preserved from
      violation. Among the Armenian nobles appeared an ally, whose
      fortunes are too remarkable to pass unnoticed. His name was
      Mamgo, 571 his origin was Scythian, and the horde which
      acknowledge his authority had encamped a very few years before on
      the skirts of the Chinese empire, 58 which at that time extended
      as far as the neighborhood of Sogdiana. 59 Having incurred the
      displeasure of his master, Mamgo, with his followers, retired to
      the banks of the Oxus, and implored the protection of Sapor. The
      emperor of China claimed the fugitive, and alleged the rights of
      sovereignty. The Persian monarch pleaded the laws of hospitality,
      and with some difficulty avoided a war, by the promise that he
      would banish Mamgo to the uttermost parts of the West, a
      punishment, as he described it, not less dreadful than death
      itself. Armenia was chosen for the place of exile, and a large
      district was assigned to the Scythian horde, on which they might
      feed their flocks and herds, and remove their encampment from one
      place to another, according to the different seasons of the year.


      They were employed to repel the invasion of Tiridates; but their
      leader, after weighing the obligations and injuries which he had
      received from the Persian monarch, resolved to abandon his party.


      The Armenian prince, who was well acquainted with the merit as
      well as power of Mamgo, treated him with distinguished respect;
      and, by admitting him into his confidence, acquired a brave and
      faithful servant, who contributed very effectually to his
      restoration. 60


      55 (return) [ Moses of Chorene. Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 74. The
      statues had been erected by Valarsaces, who reigned in Armenia
      about 130 years before Christ, and was the first king of the
      family of Arsaces, (see Moses, Hist. Armen. l. ii. 2, 3.) The
      deification of the Arsacides is mentioned by Justin, (xli. 5,)
      and by Ammianus Marcellinus, (xxiii. 6.)]


      56 (return) [ The Armenian nobility was numerous and powerful.
      Moses mentions many families which were distinguished under the
      reign of Valarsaces, (l. ii. 7,) and which still subsisted in his
      own time, about the middle of the fifth century. See the preface
      of his Editors.]


      57 (return) [ She was named Chosroiduchta, and had not the os
      patulum like other women. (Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 79.) I do not
      understand the expression. * Note: Os patulum signifies merely a
      large and widely opening mouth. Ovid (Metam. xv. 513) says,
      speaking of the monster who attacked Hippolytus, patulo partem
      maris evomit ore. Probably a wide mouth was a common defect among
      the Armenian women.—G.]


      571 (return) [ Mamgo (according to M. St. Martin, note to Le
      Beau. ii. 213) belonged to the imperial race of Hon, who had
      filled the throne of China for four hundred years. Dethroned by
      the usurping race of Wei, Mamgo found a hospitable reception in
      Persia in the reign of Ardeschir. The emperor of china having
      demanded the surrender of the fugitive and his partisans, Sapor,
      then king, threatened with war both by Rome and China, counselled
      Mamgo to retire into Armenia. “I have expelled him from my
      dominions, (he answered the Chinese ambassador;) I have banished
      him to the extremity of the earth, where the sun sets; I have
      dismissed him to certain death.” Compare Mem. sur l’Armenie, ii.
      25.—M.]


      58 (return) [ In the Armenian history, (l. ii. 78,) as well as in
      the Geography, (p. 367,) China is called Zenia, or Zenastan. It
      is characterized by the production of silk, by the opulence of
      the natives, and by their love of peace, above all the other
      nations of the earth. * Note: See St. Martin, Mem. sur l’Armenie,
      i. 304.]


      59 (return) [ Vou-ti, the first emperor of the seventh dynasty,
      who then reigned in China, had political transactions with
      Fergana, a province of Sogdiana, and is said to have received a
      Roman embassy, (Histoire des Huns, tom. i. p. 38.) In those ages
      the Chinese kept a garrison at Kashgar, and one of their
      generals, about the time of Trajan, marched as far as the Caspian
      Sea. With regard to the intercourse between China and the Western
      countries, a curious memoir of M. de Guignes may be consulted, in
      the Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxii. p. 355. * Note: The
      Chinese Annals mention, under the ninth year of Yan-hi, which
      corresponds with the year 166 J. C., an embassy which arrived
      from Tathsin, and was sent by a prince called An-thun, who can be
      no other than Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, who then ruled over the
      Romans. St. Martin, Mem. sur l’Armænic. ii. 30. See also
      Klaproth, Tableaux Historiques de l’Asie, p. 69. The embassy came
      by Jy-nan, Tonquin.—M.]


      60 (return) [ See Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 81.]


      For a while, fortune appeared to favor the enterprising valor of
      Tiridates. He not only expelled the enemies of his family and
      country from the whole extent of Armenia, but in the prosecution
      of his revenge he carried his arms, or at least his incursions,
      into the heart of Assyria. The historian, who has preserved the
      name of Tiridates from oblivion, celebrates, with a degree of
      national enthusiasm, his personal prowess: and, in the true
      spirit of eastern romance, describes the giants and the elephants
      that fell beneath his invincible arm. It is from other
      information that we discover the distracted state of the Persian
      monarchy, to which the king of Armenia was indebted for some part
      of his advantages. The throne was disputed by the ambition of
      contending brothers; and Hormuz, after exerting without success
      the strength of his own party, had recourse to the dangerous
      assistance of the barbarians who inhabited the banks of the
      Caspian Sea. 61 The civil war was, however, soon terminated,
      either by a victor or by a reconciliation; and Narses, who was
      universally acknowledged as king of Persia, directed his whole
      force against the foreign enemy. The contest then became too
      unequal; nor was the valor of the hero able to withstand the
      power of the monarch. Tiridates, a second time expelled from the
      throne of Armenia, once more took refuge in the court of the
      emperors. 611 Narses soon reëstablished his authority over the
      revolted province; and loudly complaining of the protection
      afforded by the Romans to rebels and fugitives, aspired to the
      conquest of the East. 62


      61 (return) [ Ipsos Persas ipsumque Regem ascitis Saccis, et
      Russis, et Gellis, petit frater Ormies. Panegyric. Vet. iii. 1.
      The Saccæ were a nation of wandering Scythians, who encamped
      towards the sources of the Oxus and the Jaxartes. The Gelli where
      the inhabitants of Ghilan, along the Caspian Sea, and who so
      long, under the name of Dilemines, infested the Persian monarchy.
      See d’Herbelot, Bibliotheque]


      611 (return) [ M St. Martin represents this differently. Le roi
      de Perse * * * profits d’un voyage que Tiridate avoit fait a Rome
      pour attaquer ce royaume. This reads like the evasion of the
      national historians to disguise the fact discreditable to their
      hero. See Mem. sur l’Armenie, i. 304.—M.]


      62 (return) [ Moses of Chorene takes no notice of this second
      revolution, which I have been obliged to collect from a passage
      of Ammianus Marcellinus, (l. xxiii. c. 5.) Lactantius speaks of
      the ambition of Narses: “Concitatus domesticis exemplis avi sui
      Saporis ad occupandum orientem magnis copiis inhiabat.” De Mort.
      Persecut. c. 9.]


      Neither prudence nor honor could permit the emperors to forsake
      the cause of the Armenian king, and it was resolved to exert the
      force of the empire in the Persian war. Diocletian, with the calm
      dignity which he constantly assumed, fixed his own station in the
      city of Antioch, from whence he prepared and directed the
      military operations. 63 The conduct of the legions was intrusted
      to the intrepid valor of Galerius, who, for that important
      purpose, was removed from the banks of the Danube to those of the
      Euphrates. The armies soon encountered each other in the plains
      of Mesopotamia, and two battles were fought with various and
      doubtful success; but the third engagement was of a more decisive
      nature; and the Roman army received a total overthrow, which is
      attributed to the rashness of Galerius, who, with an
      inconsiderable body of troops, attacked the innumerable host of
      the Persians. 64 But the consideration of the country that was
      the scene of action, may suggest another reason for his defeat.
      The same ground on which Galerius was vanquished, had been
      rendered memorable by the death of Crassus, and the slaughter of
      ten legions. It was a plain of more than sixty miles, which
      extended from the hills of Carrhæ to the Euphrates; a smooth and
      barren surface of sandy desert, without a hillock, without a
      tree, and without a spring of fresh water. 65 The steady infantry
      of the Romans, fainting with heat and thirst, could neither hope
      for victory if they preserved their ranks, nor break their ranks
      without exposing themselves to the most imminent danger. In this
      situation they were gradually encompassed by the superior
      numbers, harassed by the rapid evolutions, and destroyed by the
      arrows of the barbarian cavalry.


      The king of Armenia had signalized his valor in the battle, and
      acquired personal glory by the public misfortune. He was pursued
      as far as the Euphrates; his horse was wounded, and it appeared
      impossible for him to escape the victorious enemy. In this
      extremity Tiridates embraced the only refuge which appeared
      before him: he dismounted and plunged into the stream. His armor
      was heavy, the river very deep, and at those parts at least half
      a mile in breadth; 66 yet such was his strength and dexterity,
      that he reached in safety the opposite bank. 67 With regard to
      the Roman general, we are ignorant of the circumstances of his
      escape; but when he returned to Antioch, Diocletian received him,
      not with the tenderness of a friend and colleague, but with the
      indignation of an offended sovereign. The haughtiest of men,
      clothed in his purple, but humbled by the sense of his fault and
      misfortune, was obliged to follow the emperor’s chariot above a
      mile on foot, and to exhibit, before the whole court, the
      spectacle of his disgrace. 68


      63 (return) [ We may readily believe, that Lactantius ascribes to
      cowardice the conduct of Diocletian. Julian, in his oration,
      says, that he remained with all the forces of the empire; a very
      hyperbolical expression.]


      64 (return) [ Our five abbreviators, Eutropius, Festus, the two
      Victors, and Orosius, all relate the last and great battle; but
      Orosius is the only one who speaks of the two former.]


      65 (return) [ The nature of the country is finely described by
      Plutarch, in the life of Crassus; and by Xenophon, in the first
      book of the Anabasis]


      66 (return) [ See Foster’s Dissertation in the second volume of
      the translation of the Anabasis by Spelman; which I will venture
      to recommend as one of the best versions extant.]


      67 (return) [ Hist. Armen. l. ii. c. 76. I have transferred this
      exploit of Tiridates from an imaginary defeat to the real one of
      Galerius.]


      68 (return) [ Ammian. Marcellin. l. xiv. The mile, in the hands
      of Eutropoius, (ix. 24,) of Festus (c. 25,) and of Orosius, (vii
      25), easily increased to several miles]


      As soon as Diocletian had indulged his private resentment, and
      asserted the majesty of supreme power, he yielded to the
      submissive entreaties of the Cæsar, and permitted him to retrieve
      his own honor, as well as that of the Roman arms. In the room of
      the unwarlike troops of Asia, which had most probably served in
      the first expedition, a second army was drawn from the veterans
      and new levies of the Illyrian frontier, and a considerable body
      of Gothic auxiliaries were taken into the Imperial pay. 69 At the
      head of a chosen army of twenty-five thousand men, Galerius again
      passed the Euphrates; but, instead of exposing his legions in the
      open plains of Mesopotamia he advanced through the mountains of
      Armenia, where he found the inhabitants devoted to his cause, and
      the country as favorable to the operations of infantry as it was
      inconvenient for the motions of cavalry. 70 Adversity had
      confirmed the Roman discipline, while the barbarians, elated by
      success, were become so negligent and remiss, that in the moment
      when they least expected it, they were surprised by the active
      conduct of Galerius, who, attended only by two horsemen, had with
      his own eyes secretly examined the state and position of their
      camp. A surprise, especially in the night time, was for the most
      part fatal to a Persian army. “Their horses were tied, and
      generally shackled, to prevent their running away; and if an
      alarm happened, a Persian had his housing to fix, his horse to
      bridle, and his corselet to put on, before he could mount.” 71 On
      this occasion, the impetuous attack of Galerius spread disorder
      and dismay over the camp of the barbarians. A slight resistance
      was followed by a dreadful carnage, and, in the general
      confusion, the wounded monarch (for Narses commanded his armies
      in person) fled towards the deserts of Media. His sumptuous
      tents, and those of his satraps, afforded an immense booty to the
      conqueror; and an incident is mentioned, which proves the rustic
      but martial ignorance of the legions in the elegant superfluities
      of life. A bag of shining leather, filled with pearls, fell into
      the hands of a private soldier; he carefully preserved the bag,
      but he threw away its contents, judging that whatever was of no
      use could not possibly be of any value. 72 The principal loss of
      Narses was of a much more affecting nature. Several of his wives,
      his sisters, and children, who had attended the army, were made
      captives in the defeat. But though the character of Galerius had
      in general very little affinity with that of Alexander, he
      imitated, after his victory, the amiable behavior of the
      Macedonian towards the family of Darius. The wives and children
      of Narses were protected from violence and rapine, conveyed to a
      place of safety, and treated with every mark of respect and
      tenderness, that was due from a generous enemy to their age,
      their sex, and their royal dignity. 73


      69 (return) [ Aurelius Victor. Jornandes de Rebus Geticis, c.
      21.]


      70 (return) [ Aurelius Victor says, “Per Armeniam in hostes
      contendit, quæ fermo sola, seu facilior vincendi via est.” He
      followed the conduct of Trajan, and the idea of Julius Cæsar.]


      71 (return) [ Xenophon’s Anabasis, l. iii. For that reason the
      Persian cavalry encamped sixty stadia from the enemy.]


      72 (return) [ The story is told by Ammianus, l. xxii. Instead of
      saccum, some read scutum.]


      73 (return) [ The Persians confessed the Roman superiority in
      morals as well as in arms. Eutrop. ix. 24. But this respect and
      gratitude of enemies is very seldom to be found in their own
      accounts.]


      Chapter XIII: Reign Of Diocletian And His Three Associates.—Part
      III.


      While the East anxiously expected the decision of this great
      contest, the emperor Diocletian, having assembled in Syria a
      strong army of observation, displayed from a distance the
      resources of the Roman power, and reserved himself for any future
      emergency of the war. On the intelligence of the victory he
      condescended to advance towards the frontier, with a view of
      moderating, by his presence and counsels, the pride of Galerius.
      The interview of the Roman princes at Nisibis was accompanied
      with every expression of respect on one side, and of esteem on
      the other. It was in that city that they soon afterwards gave
      audience to the ambassador of the Great King. 74 The power, or at
      least the spirit, of Narses, had been broken by his last defeat;
      and he considered an immediate peace as the only means that could
      stop the progress of the Roman arms. He despatched Apharban, a
      servant who possessed his favor and confidence, with a commission
      to negotiate a treaty, or rather to receive whatever conditions
      the conqueror should impose. Apharban opened the conference by
      expressing his master’s gratitude for the generous treatment of
      his family, and by soliciting the liberty of those illustrious
      captives. He celebrated the valor of Galerius, without degrading
      the reputation of Narses, and thought it no dishonor to confess
      the superiority of the victorious Cæsar, over a monarch who had
      surpassed in glory all the princes of his race. Notwithstanding
      the justice of the Persian cause, he was empowered to submit the
      present differences to the decision of the emperors themselves;
      convinced as he was, that, in the midst of prosperity, they would
      not be unmindful of the vicissitudes of fortune. Apharban
      concluded his discourse in the style of eastern allegory, by
      observing that the Roman and Persian monarchies were the two eyes
      of the world, which would remain imperfect and mutilated if
      either of them should be put out.


      74 (return) [ The account of the negotiation is taken from the
      fragments of Peter the Patrician, in the Excerpta Legationum,
      published in the Byzantine Collection. Peter lived under
      Justinian; but it is very evident, by the nature of his
      materials, that they are drawn from the most authentic and
      respectable writers.]


      “It well becomes the Persians,” replied Galerius, with a
      transport of fury, which seemed to convulse his whole frame, “it
      well becomes the Persians to expatiate on the vicissitudes of
      fortune, and calmly to read us lectures on the virtues of
      moderation. Let them remember their own _moderation_ towards the
      unhappy Valerian. They vanquished him by fraud, they treated him
      with indignity. They detained him till the last moment of his
      life in shameful captivity, and after his death they exposed his
      body to perpetual ignominy.” Softening, however, his tone,
      Galerius insinuated to the ambassador, that it had never been the
      practice of the Romans to trample on a prostrate enemy; and that,
      on this occasion, they should consult their own dignity rather
      than the Persian merit. He dismissed Apharban with a hope that
      Narses would soon be informed on what conditions he might obtain,
      from the clemency of the emperors, a lasting peace, and the
      restoration of his wives and children. In this conference we may
      discover the fierce passions of Galerius, as well as his
      deference to the superior wisdom and authority of Diocletian. The
      ambition of the former grasped at the conquest of the East, and
      had proposed to reduce Persia into the state of a province. The
      prudence of the latter, who adhered to the moderate policy of
      Augustus and the Antonines, embraced the favorable opportunity of
      terminating a successful war by an honorable and advantageous
      peace. 75


      75 (return) [ Adeo victor (says Aurelius) ut ni Valerius, cujus
      nutu omnis gerebantur, abnuisset, Romani fasces in provinciam
      novam ferrentur Verum pars terrarum tamen nobis utilior quæsita.]


      In pursuance of their promise, the emperors soon afterwards
      appointed Sicorius Probus, one of their secretaries, to acquaint
      the Persian court with their final resolution. As the minister of
      peace, he was received with every mark of politeness and
      friendship; but, under the pretence of allowing him the necessary
      repose after so long a journey, the audience of Probus was
      deferred from day to day; and he attended the slow motions of the
      king, till at length he was admitted to his presence, near the
      River Asprudus in Media. The secret motive of Narses, in this
      delay, had been to collect such a military force as might enable
      him, though sincerely desirous of peace, to negotiate with the
      greater weight and dignity. Three persons only assisted at this
      important conference, the minister Apharban, the præfect of the
      guards, and an officer who had commanded on the Armenian
      frontier. 76 The first condition proposed by the ambassador is
      not at present of a very intelligible nature; that the city of
      Nisibis might be established for the place of mutual exchange,
      or, as we should formerly have termed it, for the staple of
      trade, between the two empires. There is no difficulty in
      conceiving the intention of the Roman princes to improve their
      revenue by some restraints upon commerce; but as Nisibis was
      situated within their own dominions, and as they were masters
      both of the imports and exports, it should seem that such
      restraints were the objects of an internal law, rather than of a
      foreign treaty. To render them more effectual, some stipulations
      were probably required on the side of the king of Persia, which
      appeared so very repugnant either to his interest or to his
      dignity, that Narses could not be persuaded to subscribe them. As
      this was the only article to which he refused his consent, it was
      no longer insisted on; and the emperors either suffered the trade
      to flow in its natural channels, or contented themselves with
      such restrictions, as it depended on their own authority to
      establish.


      76 (return) [ He had been governor of Sumium, (Pot. Patricius in
      Excerpt. Legat. p. 30.) This province seems to be mentioned by
      Moses of Chorene, (Geograph. p. 360,) and lay to the east of
      Mount Ararat. * Note: The Siounikh of the Armenian writers St.
      Martin i. 142.—M.]


      As soon as this difficulty was removed, a solemn peace was
      concluded and ratified between the two nations. The conditions of
      a treaty so glorious to the empire, and so necessary to Persia,
      may deserve a more peculiar attention, as the history of Rome
      presents very few transactions of a similar nature; most of her
      wars having either been terminated by absolute conquest, or waged
      against barbarians ignorant of the use of letters. I. The Aboras,
      or, as it is called by Xenophon, the Araxes, was fixed as the
      boundary between the two monarchies. 77 That river, which rose
      near the Tigris, was increased, a few miles below Nisibis, by the
      little stream of the Mygdonius, passed under the walls of
      Singara, and fell into the Euphrates at Circesium, a frontier
      town, which, by the care of Diocletian, was very strongly
      fortified. 78 Mesopotomia, the object of so many wars, was ceded
      to the empire; and the Persians, by this treaty, renounced all
      pretensions to that great province. II. They relinquished to the
      Romans five provinces beyond the Tigris. 79 Their situation
      formed a very useful barrier, and their natural strength was soon
      improved by art and military skill. Four of these, to the north
      of the river, were districts of obscure fame and inconsiderable
      extent; Intiline, Zabdicene, Arzanene, and Moxoene; 791 but on
      the east of the Tigris, the empire acquired the large and
      mountainous territory of Carduene, the ancient seat of the
      Carduchians, who preserved for many ages their manly freedom in
      the heart of the despotic monarchies of Asia. The ten thousand
      Greeks traversed their country, after a painful march, or rather
      engagement, of seven days; and it is confessed by their leader,
      in his incomparable relation of the retreat, that they suffered
      more from the arrows of the Carduchians, than from the power of
      the Great King. 80 Their posterity, the Curds, with very little
      alteration either of name or manners, 801 acknowledged the
      nominal sovereignty of the Turkish sultan. III. It is almost
      needless to observe, that Tiridates, the faithful ally of Rome,
      was restored to the throne of his fathers, and that the rights of
      the Imperial supremacy were fully asserted and secured. The
      limits of Armenia were extended as far as the fortress of Sintha
      in Media, and this increase of dominion was not so much an act of
      liberality as of justice. Of the provinces already mentioned
      beyond the Tigris, the four first had been dismembered by the
      Parthians from the crown of Armenia; 81 and when the Romans
      acquired the possession of them, they stipulated, at the expense
      of the usurpers, an ample compensation, which invested their ally
      with the extensive and fertile country of Atropatene. Its
      principal city, in the same situation perhaps as the modern
      Tauris, was frequently honored by the residence of Tiridates; and
      as it sometimes bore the name of Ecbatana, he imitated, in the
      buildings and fortifications, the splendid capital of the Medes.
      82 IV. The country of Iberia was barren, its inhabitants rude and
      savage. But they were accustomed to the use of arms, and they
      separated from the empire barbarians much fiercer and more
      formidable than themselves. The narrow defiles of Mount Caucasus
      were in their hands, and it was in their choice, either to admit
      or to exclude the wandering tribes of Sarmatia, whenever a
      rapacious spirit urged them to penetrate into the richer climes
      of the South. 83 The nomination of the kings of Iberia, which was
      resigned by the Persian monarch to the emperors, contributed to
      the strength and security of the Roman power in Asia. 84 The East
      enjoyed a profound tranquillity during forty years; and the
      treaty between the rival monarchies was strictly observed till
      the death of Tiridates; when a new generation, animated with
      different views and different passions, succeeded to the
      government of the world; and the grandson of Narses undertook a
      long and memorable war against the princes of the house of
      Constantine.


      77 (return) [ By an error of the geographer Ptolemy, the position
      of Singara is removed from the Aboras to the Tigris, which may
      have produced the mistake of Peter, in assigning the latter river
      for the boundary, instead of the former. The line of the Roman
      frontier traversed, but never followed, the course of the Tigris.
      * Note: There are here several errors. Gibbon has confounded the
      streams, and the towns which they pass. The Aboras, or rather the
      Chaboras, the Araxes of Xenophon, has its source above Ras-Ain or
      Re-Saina, (Theodosiopolis,) about twenty-seven leagues from the
      Tigris; it receives the waters of the Mygdonius, or Saocoras,
      about thirty-three leagues below Nisibis. at a town now called Al
      Nahraim; it does not pass under the walls of Singara; it is the
      Saocoras that washes the walls of that town: the latter river has
      its source near Nisibis. at five leagues from the Tigris. See
      D’Anv. l’Euphrate et le Tigre, 46, 49, 50, and the map.—— To the
      east of the Tigris is another less considerable river, named also
      the Chaboras, which D’Anville calls the Centrites, Khabour,
      Nicephorius, without quoting the authorities on which he gives
      those names. Gibbon did not mean to speak of this river, which
      does not pass by Singara, and does not fall into the Euphrates.
      See Michaelis, Supp. ad Lex. Hebraica. 3d part, p. 664, 665.—G.]


      78 (return) [ Procopius de Edificiis, l. ii. c. 6.]


      79 (return) [ Three of the provinces, Zabdicene, Arzanene, and
      Carduene, are allowed on all sides. But instead of the other two,
      Peter (in Excerpt. Leg. p. 30) inserts Rehimene and Sophene. I
      have preferred Ammianus, (l. xxv. 7,) because it might be proved
      that Sophene was never in the hands of the Persians, either
      before the reign of Diocletian, or after that of Jovian. For want
      of correct maps, like those of M. d’Anville, almost all the
      moderns, with Tillemont and Valesius at their head, have
      imagined, that it was in respect to Persia, and not to Rome, that
      the five provinces were situate beyond the Tigris.]


      791 (return) [ See St. Martin, note on Le Beau, i. 380. He would
      read, for Intiline, Ingeleme, the name of a small province of
      Armenia, near the sources of the Tigris, mentioned by St.
      Epiphanius, (Hæres, 60;) for the unknown name Arzacene, with
      Gibbon, Arzanene. These provinces do not appear to have made an
      integral part of the Roman empire; Roman garrisons replaced those
      of Persia, but the sovereignty remained in the hands of the
      feudatory princes of Armenia. A prince of Carduene, ally or
      dependent on the empire, with the Roman name of Jovianus, occurs
      in the reign of Julian.—M.]


      80 (return) [ Xenophon’s Anabasis, l. iv. Their bows were three
      cubits in length, their arrows two; they rolled down stones that
      were each a wagon load. The Greeks found a great many villages in
      that rude country.]


      801 (return) [ I travelled through this country in 1810, and
      should judge, from what I have read and seen of its inhabitants,
      that they have remained unchanged in their appearance and
      character for more than twenty centuries Malcolm, note to Hist.
      of Persia, vol. i. p. 82.—M.]


      81 (return) [ According to Eutropius, (vi. 9, as the text is
      represented by the best Mss.,) the city of Tigranocerta was in
      Arzanene. The names and situation of the other three may be
      faintly traced.]


      82 (return) [ Compare Herodotus, l. i. c. 97, with Moses
      Choronens. Hist Armen. l. ii. c. 84, and the map of Armenia given
      by his editors.]


      83 (return) [ Hiberi, locorum potentes, Caspia via Sarmatam in
      Armenios raptim effundunt. Tacit. Annal. vi. 34. See Strabon.
      Geograph. l. xi. p. 764, edit. Casaub.]


      84 (return) [ Peter Patricius (in Excerpt. Leg. p. 30) is the
      only writer who mentions the Iberian article of the treaty.]


      The arduous work of rescuing the distressed empire from tyrants
      and barbarians had now been completely achieved by a succession
      of Illyrian peasants. As soon as Diocletian entered into the
      twentieth year of his reign, he celebrated that memorable æra, as
      well as the success of his arms, by the pomp of a Roman triumph.
      85 Maximian, the equal partner of his power, was his only
      companion in the glory of that day. The two Cæsars had fought and
      conquered, but the merit of their exploits was ascribed,
      according to the rigor of ancient maxims, to the auspicious
      influence of their fathers and emperors. 86 The triumph of
      Diocletian and Maximian was less magnificent, perhaps, than those
      of Aurelian and Probus, but it was dignified by several
      circumstances of superior fame and good fortune. Africa and
      Britain, the Rhine, the Danube, and the Nile, furnished their
      respective trophies; but the most distinguished ornament was of a
      more singular nature, a Persian victory followed by an important
      conquest. The representations of rivers, mountains, and
      provinces, were carried before the Imperial car. The images of
      the captive wives, the sisters, and the children of the Great
      King, afforded a new and grateful spectacle to the vanity of the
      people. 87 In the eyes of posterity, this triumph is remarkable,
      by a distinction of a less honorable kind. It was the last that
      Rome ever beheld. Soon after this period, the emperors ceased to
      vanquish, and Rome ceased to be the capital of the empire.


      85 (return) [ Euseb. in Chron. Pagi ad annum. Till the discovery
      of the treatise De Mortibus Persecutorum, it was not certain that
      the triumph and the Vicennalia was celebrated at the same time.]


      86 (return) [ At the time of the Vicennalia, Galerius seems to
      have kept station on the Danube. See Lactant. de M. P. c. 38.]


      87 (return) [ Eutropius (ix. 27) mentions them as a part of the
      triumph. As the persons had been restored to Narses, nothing more
      than their images could be exhibited.]


      The spot on which Rome was founded had been consecrated by
      ancient ceremonies and imaginary miracles. The presence of some
      god, or the memory of some hero, seemed to animate every part of
      the city, and the empire of the world had been promised to the
      Capitol. 88 The native Romans felt and confessed the power of
      this agreeable illusion. It was derived from their ancestors, had
      grown up with their earliest habits of life, and was protected,
      in some measure, by the opinion of political utility. The form
      and the seat of government were intimately blended together, nor
      was it esteemed possible to transport the one without destroying
      the other. 89 But the sovereignty of the capital was gradually
      annihilated in the extent of conquest; the provinces rose to the
      same level, and the vanquished nations acquired the name and
      privileges, without imbibing the partial affections, of Romans.
      During a long period, however, the remains of the ancient
      constitution, and the influence of custom, preserved the dignity
      of Rome. The emperors, though perhaps of African or Illyrian
      extraction, respected their adopted country, as the seat of their
      power, and the centre of their extensive dominions. The
      emergencies of war very frequently required their presence on the
      frontiers; but Diocletian and Maximian were the first Roman
      princes who fixed, in time of peace, their ordinary residence in
      the provinces; and their conduct, however it might be suggested
      by private motives, was justified by very specious considerations
      of policy. The court of the emperor of the West was, for the most
      part, established at Milan, whose situation, at the foot of the
      Alps, appeared far more convenient than that of Rome, for the
      important purpose of watching the motions of the barbarians of
      Germany. Milan soon assumed the splendor of an Imperial city. The
      houses are described as numerous and well built; the manners of
      the people as polished and liberal. A circus, a theatre, a mint,
      a palace, baths, which bore the name of their founder Maximian;
      porticos adorned with statues, and a double circumference of
      walls, contributed to the beauty of the new capital; nor did it
      seem oppressed even by the proximity of Rome. 90 To rival the
      majesty of Rome was the ambition likewise of Diocletian, who
      employed his leisure, and the wealth of the East, in the
      embellishment of Nicomedia, a city placed on the verge of Europe
      and Asia, almost at an equal distance between the Danube and the
      Euphrates. By the taste of the monarch, and at the expense of the
      people, Nicomedia acquired, in the space of a few years, a degree
      of magnificence which might appear to have required the labor of
      ages, and became inferior only to Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch,
      in extent of populousness. 91 The life of Diocletian and Maximian
      was a life of action, and a considerable portion of it was spent
      in camps, or in the long and frequent marches; but whenever the
      public business allowed them any relaxation, they seemed to have
      retired with pleasure to their favorite residences of Nicomedia
      and Milan. Till Diocletian, in the twentieth year of his reign,
      celebrated his Roman triumph, it is extremely doubtful whether he
      ever visited the ancient capital of the empire. Even on that
      memorable occasion his stay did not exceed two months. Disgusted
      with the licentious familiarity of the people, he quitted Rome
      with precipitation thirteen days before it was expected that he
      should have appeared in the senate, invested with the ensigns of
      the consular dignity. 92


      88 (return) [ Livy gives us a speech of Camillus on that subject,
      (v. 51—55,) full of eloquence and sensibility, in opposition to a
      design of removing the seat of government from Rome to the
      neighboring city of Veii.]


      89 (return) [ Julius Cæsar was reproached with the intention of
      removing the empire to Ilium or Alexandria. See Sueton. in Cæsar.
      c. 79. According to the ingenious conjecture of Le Fevre and
      Dacier, the ode of the third book of Horace was intended to
      divert from the execution of a similar design.]


      90 (return) [ See Aurelius Victor, who likewise mentions the
      buildings erected by Maximian at Carthage, probably during the
      Moorish war. We shall insert some verses of Ausonius de Clar.
      Urb. v.—— Et Mediolani miræomnia: copia rerum; Innumeræ cultæque
      domus; facunda virorum Ingenia, et mores læti: tum duplice muro
      Amplificata loci species; populique voluptas Circus; et inclusi
      moles cuneata Theatri; Templa, Palatinæque arces, opulensque
      Moneta, Et regio Herculei celebris sub honore lavacri. Cunctaque
      marmoreis ornata Peristyla signis; Moeniaque in valli formam
      circumdata labro, Omnia quæ magnis operum velut æmula formis
      Excellunt: nec juncta premit vicinia Romæ.]


      91 (return) [ Lactant. de M. P. c. 17. Libanius, Orat. viii. p.
      203.]


      92 (return) [ Lactant. de M. P. c. 17. On a similar occasion,
      Ammianus mentions the dicacitas plebis, as not very agreeable to
      an Imperial ear. (See l. xvi. c. 10.)]


      The dislike expressed by Diocletian towards Rome and Roman
      freedom was not the effect of momentary caprice, but the result
      of the most artful policy. That crafty prince had framed a new
      system of Imperial government, which was afterwards completed by
      the family of Constantine; and as the image of the old
      constitution was religiously preserved in the senate, he resolved
      to deprive that order of its small remains of power and
      consideration. We may recollect, about eight years before the
      elevation of Diocletian, the transient greatness, and the
      ambitious hopes, of the Roman senate. As long as that enthusiasm
      prevailed, many of the nobles imprudently displayed their zeal in
      the cause of freedom; and after the successes of Probus had
      withdrawn their countenance from the republican party, the
      senators were unable to disguise their impotent resentment.


      As the sovereign of Italy, Maximian was intrusted with the care
      of extinguishing this troublesome, rather than dangerous spirit,
      and the task was perfectly suited to his cruel temper. The most
      illustrious members of the senate, whom Diocletian always
      affected to esteem, were involved, by his colleague, in the
      accusation of imaginary plots; and the possession of an elegant
      villa, or a well-cultivated estate, was interpreted as a
      convincing evidence of guilt. 93 The camp of the Prætorians,
      which had so long oppressed, began to protect, the majesty of
      Rome; and as those haughty troops were conscious of the decline
      of their power, they were naturally disposed to unite their
      strength with the authority of the senate. By the prudent
      measures of Diocletian, the numbers of the Prætorians were
      insensibly reduced, their privileges abolished, 94 and their
      place supplied by two faithful legions of Illyricum, who, under
      the new titles of Jovians and Herculians, were appointed to
      perform the service of the Imperial guards. 95 But the most fatal
      though secret wound, which the senate received from the hands of
      Diocletian and Maximian, was inflicted by the inevitable
      operation of their absence. As long as the emperors resided at
      Rome, that assembly might be oppressed, but it could scarcely be
      neglected. The successors of Augustus exercised the power of
      dictating whatever laws their wisdom or caprice might suggest;
      but those laws were ratified by the sanction of the senate. The
      model of ancient freedom was preserved in its deliberations and
      decrees; and wise princes, who respected the prejudices of the
      Roman people, were in some measure obliged to assume the language
      and behavior suitable to the general and first magistrate of the
      republic. In the armies and in the provinces, they displayed the
      dignity of monarchs; and when they fixed their residence at a
      distance from the capital, they forever laid aside the
      dissimulation which Augustus had recommended to his successors.
      In the exercise of the legislative as well as the executive
      power, the sovereign advised with his ministers, instead of
      consulting the great council of the nation. The name of the
      senate was mentioned with honor till the last period of the
      empire; the vanity of its members was still flattered with
      honorary distinctions; 96 but the assembly which had so long been
      the source, and so long the instrument of power, was respectfully
      suffered to sink into oblivion. The senate of Rome, losing all
      connection with the Imperial court and the actual constitution,
      was left a venerable but useless monument of antiquity on the
      Capitoline hill.


      93 (return) [ Lactantius accuses Maximian of destroying fictis
      criminationibus lumina senatus, (De M. P. c. 8.) Aurelius Victor
      speaks very doubtfully of the faith of Diocletian towards his
      friends.]


      94 (return) [ Truncatæ vires urbis, imminuto prætoriarum
      cohortium atque in armis vulgi numero. Aurelius Victor.
      Lactantius attributes to Galerius the prosecution of the same
      plan, (c. 26.)]


      95 (return) [ They were old corps stationed in Illyricum; and
      according to the ancient establishment, they each consisted of
      six thousand men. They had acquired much reputation by the use of
      the plumbatæ, or darts loaded with lead. Each soldier carried
      five of these, which he darted from a considerable distance, with
      great strength and dexterity. See Vegetius, i. 17.]


      96 (return) [ See the Theodosian Code, l. vi. tit. ii. with
      Godefroy’s commentary.]


      Chapter XIII: Reign Of Diocletian And His Three Associates.—Part
      IV.


      When the Roman princes had lost sight of the senate and of their
      ancient capital, they easily forgot the origin and nature of
      their legal power. The civil offices of consul, of proconsul, of
      censor, and of tribune, by the union of which it had been formed,
      betrayed to the people its republican extraction. Those modest
      titles were laid aside; 97 and if they still distinguished their
      high station by the appellation of Emperor, or Imperator, that
      word was understood in a new and more dignified sense, and no
      longer denoted the general of the Roman armies, but the sovereign
      of the Roman world. The name of Emperor, which was at first of a
      military nature, was associated with another of a more servile
      kind. The epithet of Dominus, or Lord, in its primitive
      signification, was expressive not of the authority of a prince
      over his subjects, or of a commander over his soldiers, but of
      the despotic power of a master over his domestic slaves. 98
      Viewing it in that odious light, it had been rejected with
      abhorrence by the first Cæsars. Their resistance insensibly
      became more feeble, and the name less odious; till at length the
      style of _our Lord and Emperor_ was not only bestowed by
      flattery, but was regularly admitted into the laws and public
      monuments. Such lofty epithets were sufficient to elate and
      satisfy the most excessive vanity; and if the successors of
      Diocletian still declined the title of King, it seems to have
      been the effect not so much of their moderation as of their
      delicacy. Wherever the Latin tongue was in use, (and it was the
      language of government throughout the empire,) the Imperial
      title, as it was peculiar to themselves, conveyed a more
      respectable idea than the name of king, which they must have
      shared with a hundred barbarian chieftains; or which, at the
      best, they could derive only from Romulus, or from Tarquin. But
      the sentiments of the East were very different from those of the
      West. From the earliest period of history, the sovereigns of Asia
      had been celebrated in the Greek language by the title of
      Basileus, or King; and since it was considered as the first
      distinction among men, it was soon employed by the servile
      provincials of the East, in their humble addresses to the Roman
      throne. 99 Even the attributes, or at least the titles, of the
      DIVINITY, were usurped by Diocletian and Maximian, who
      transmitted them to a succession of Christian emperors. 100 Such
      extravagant compliments, however, soon lose their impiety by
      losing their meaning; and when the ear is once accustomed to the
      sound, they are heard with indifference, as vague though
      excessive professions of respect.


      97 (return) [ See the 12th dissertation in Spanheim’s excellent
      work de Usu Numismatum. From medals, inscriptions, and
      historians, he examines every title separately, and traces it
      from Augustus to the moment of its disappearing.]


      98 (return) [ Pliny (in Panegyr. c. 3, 55, &c.) speaks of Dominus
      with execration, as synonymous to Tyrant, and opposite to Prince.
      And the same Pliny regularly gives that title (in the tenth book
      of the epistles) to his friend rather than master, the virtuous
      Trajan. This strange contradiction puzzles the commentators, who
      think, and the translators, who can write.]


      99 (return) [ Synesius de Regno, edit. Petav. p. 15. I am
      indebted for this quotation to the Abbé de la Bleterie.]


      100 (return) [ Soe Vandale de Consecratione, p. 354, &c. It was
      customary for the emperors to mention (in the preamble of laws)
      their numen, sacreo majesty, divine oracles, &c. According to
      Tillemont, Gregory Nazianzen complains most bitterly of the
      profanation, especially when it was practised by an Arian
      emperor. * Note: In the time of the republic, says Hegewisch,
      when the consuls, the prætors, and the other magistrates appeared
      in public, to perform the functions of their office, their
      dignity was announced both by the symbols which use had
      consecrated, and the brilliant cortege by which they were
      accompanied. But this dignity belonged to the office, not to the
      individual; this pomp belonged to the magistrate, not to the man.
      * * The consul, followed, in the comitia, by all the senate, the
      prætors, the quæstors, the ædiles, the lictors, the apparitors,
      and the heralds, on reentering his house, was served only by
      freedmen and by his slaves. The first emperors went no further.
      Tiberius had, for his personal attendance, only a moderate number
      of slaves, and a few freedmen. (Tacit. Ann. iv. 7.) But in
      proportion as the republican forms disappeared, one after
      another, the inclination of the emperors to environ themselves
      with personal pomp, displayed itself more and more. ** The
      magnificence and the ceremonial of the East were entirely
      introduced by Diocletian, and were consecrated by Constantine to
      the Imperial use. Thenceforth the palace, the court, the table,
      all the personal attendance, distinguished the emperor from his
      subjects, still more than his superior dignity. The organization
      which Diocletian gave to his new court, attached less honor and
      distinction to rank than to services performed towards the
      members of the Imperial family. Hegewisch, Essai, Hist. sur les
      Finances Romains. Few historians have characterized, in a more
      philosophic manner, the influence of a new institution.—G.——It is
      singular that the son of a slave reduced the haughty aristocracy
      of Home to the offices of servitude.—M.]


      From the time of Augustus to that of Diocletian, the Roman
      princes, conversing in a familiar manner among their
      fellow-citizens, were saluted only with the same respect that was
      usually paid to senators and magistrates. Their principal
      distinction was the Imperial or military robe of purple; whilst
      the senatorial garment was marked by a broad, and the equestrian
      by a narrow, band or stripe of the same honorable color. The
      pride, or rather the policy, of Diocletian engaged that artful
      prince to introduce the stately magnificence of the court of
      Persia. 101 He ventured to assume the diadem, an ornament
      detested by the Romans as the odious ensign of royalty, and the
      use of which had been considered as the most desperate act of the
      madness of Caligula. It was no more than a broad white fillet set
      with pearls, which encircled the emperor’s head. The sumptuous
      robes of Diocletian and his successors were of silk and gold; and
      it is remarked with indignation that even their shoes were
      studded with the most precious gems. The access to their sacred
      person was every day rendered more difficult by the institution
      of new forms and ceremonies. The avenues of the palace were
      strictly guarded by the various schools, as they began to be
      called, of domestic officers. The interior apartments were
      intrusted to the jealous vigilance of the eunuchs, the increase
      of whose numbers and influence was the most infallible symptom of
      the progress of despotism. When a subject was at length admitted
      to the Imperial presence, he was obliged, whatever might be his
      rank, to fall prostrate on the ground, and to adore, according to
      the eastern fashion, the divinity of his lord and master. 102
      Diocletian was a man of sense, who, in the course of private as
      well as public life, had formed a just estimate both of himself
      and of mankind; nor is it easy to conceive that in substituting
      the manners of Persia to those of Rome he was seriously actuated
      by so mean a principle as that of vanity. He flattered himself
      that an ostentation of splendor and luxury would subdue the
      imagination of the multitude; that the monarch would be less
      exposed to the rude license of the people and the soldiers, as
      his person was secluded from the public view; and that habits of
      submission would insensibly be productive of sentiments of
      veneration. Like the modesty affected by Augustus, the state
      maintained by Diocletian was a theatrical representation; but it
      must be confessed, that of the two comedies, the former was of a
      much more liberal and manly character than the latter. It was the
      aim of the one to disguise, and the object of the other to
      display, the unbounded power which the emperors possessed over
      the Roman world.


      101 (return) [ See Spanheim de Usu Numismat. Dissert. xii.]


      102 (return) [ Aurelius Victor. Eutropius, ix. 26. It appears by
      the Panegyrists, that the Romans were soon reconciled to the name
      and ceremony of adoration.]


      Ostentation was the first principle of the new system instituted
      by Diocletian. The second was division. He divided the empire,
      the provinces, and every branch of the civil as well as military
      administration. He multiplied the wheels of the machine of
      government, and rendered its operations less rapid, but more
      secure. Whatever advantages and whatever defects might attend
      these innovations, they must be ascribed in a very great degree
      to the first inventor; but as the new frame of policy was
      gradually improved and completed by succeeding princes, it will
      be more satisfactory to delay the consideration of it till the
      season of its full maturity and perfection. 103 Reserving,
      therefore, for the reign of Constantine a more exact picture of
      the new empire, we shall content ourselves with describing the
      principal and decisive outline, as it was traced by the hand of
      Diocletian. He had associated three colleagues in the exercise of
      the supreme power; and as he was convinced that the abilities of
      a single man were inadequate to the public defence, he considered
      the joint administration of four princes not as a temporary
      expedient, but as a fundamental law of the constitution. It was
      his intention that the two elder princes should be distinguished
      by the use of the diadem, and the title of _Augusti;_ that, as
      affection or esteem might direct their choice, they should
      regularly call to their assistance two subordinate colleagues;
      and that the _Cæsars_, rising in their turn to the first rank,
      should supply an uninterrupted succession of emperors. The empire
      was divided into four parts. The East and Italy were the most
      honorable, the Danube and the Rhine the most laborious stations.
      The former claimed the presence of the _Augusti_, the latter were
      intrusted to the administration of the _Cæsars_. The strength of
      the legions was in the hands of the four partners of sovereignty,
      and the despair of successively vanquishing four formidable
      rivals might intimidate the ambition of an aspiring general. In
      their civil government the emperors were supposed to exercise the
      undivided power of the monarch, and their edicts, inscribed with
      their joint names, were received in all the provinces, as
      promulgated by their mutual councils and authority.
      Notwithstanding these precautions, the political union of the
      Roman world was gradually dissolved, and a principle of division
      was introduced, which, in the course of a few years, occasioned
      the perpetual separation of the Eastern and Western Empires.


      103 (return) [ The innovations introduced by Diocletian are
      chiefly deduced, 1st, from some very strong passages in
      Lactantius; and, 2dly, from the new and various offices which, in
      the Theodosian code, appear already established in the beginning
      of the reign of Constantine.]


      The system of Diocletian was accompanied with another very
      material disadvantage, which cannot even at present be totally
      overlooked; a more expensive establishment, and consequently an
      increase of taxes, and the oppression of the people. Instead of a
      modest family of slaves and freedmen, such as had contented the
      simple greatness of Augustus and Trajan, three or four
      magnificent courts were established in the various parts of the
      empire, and as many Roman _kings_ contended with each other and
      with the Persian monarch for the vain superiority of pomp and
      luxury. The number of ministers, of magistrates, of officers, and
      of servants, who filled the different departments of the state,
      was multiplied beyond the example of former times; and (if we may
      borrow the warm expression of a contemporary) “when the
      proportion of those who received exceeded the proportion of those
      who contributed, the provinces were oppressed by the weight of
      tributes.” 104 From this period to the extinction of the empire,
      it would be easy to deduce an uninterrupted series of clamors and
      complaints. According to his religion and situation, each writer
      chooses either Diocletian, or Constantine, or Valens, or
      Theodosius, for the object of his invectives; but they
      unanimously agree in representing the burden of the public
      impositions, and particularly the land tax and capitation, as the
      intolerable and increasing grievance of their own times. From
      such a concurrence, an impartial historian, who is obliged to
      extract truth from satire, as well as from panegyric, will be
      inclined to divide the blame among the princes whom they accuse,
      and to ascribe their exactions much less to their personal vices,
      than to the uniform system of their administration. 1041 The
      emperor Diocletian was indeed the author of that system; but
      during his reign, the growing evil was confined within the bounds
      of modesty and discretion, and he deserves the reproach of
      establishing pernicious precedents, rather than of exercising
      actual oppression. 105 It may be added, that his revenues were
      managed with prudent economy; and that after all the current
      expenses were discharged, there still remained in the Imperial
      treasury an ample provision either for judicious liberality or
      for any emergency of the state.


      104 (return) [ Lactant. de M. P. c. 7.]


      1041 (return) [ The most curious document which has come to light
      since the publication of Gibbon’s History, is the edict of
      Diocletian, published from an inscription found at Eskihissar,
      (Stratoniccia,) by Col. Leake. This inscription was first copied
      by Sherard, afterwards much more completely by Mr. Bankes. It is
      confirmed and illustrated by a more imperfect copy of the same
      edict, found in the Levant by a gentleman of Aix, and brought to
      this country by M. Vescovali. This edict was issued in the name
      of the four Cæsars, Diocletian, Maximian, Constantius, and
      Galerius. It fixed a maximum of prices throughout the empire, for
      all the necessaries and commodities of life. The preamble
      insists, with great vehemence on the extortion and inhumanity of
      the venders and merchants. Quis enim adeo obtunisi (obtusi)
      pectores (is) et a sensu inhumanitatis extorris est qui ignorare
      potest immo non senserit in venalibus rebus quævel in mercimoniis
      aguntur vel diurna urbium conversatione tractantur, in tantum se
      licen liam defusisse, ut effrænata libido rapien—rum copia nec
      annorum ubertatibus mitigaretur. The edict, as Col. Leake clearly
      shows, was issued A. C. 303. Among the articles of which the
      maximum value is assessed, are oil, salt, honey, butchers’ meat,
      poultry, game, fish, vegetables, fruit the wages of laborers and
      artisans, schoolmasters and skins, boots and shoes, harness,
      timber, corn, wine, and beer, (zythus.) The depreciation in the
      value of money, or the rise in the price of commodities, had been
      so great during the past century, that butchers’ meat, which, in
      the second century of the empire, was in Rome about two denaril
      the pound, was now fixed at a maximum of eight. Col. Leake
      supposes the average price could not be less than four: at the
      same time the maximum of the wages of the agricultural laborers
      was twenty-five. The whole edict is, perhaps, the most gigantic
      effort of a blind though well-intentioned despotism, to control
      that which is, and ought to be, beyond the regulation of the
      government. See an Edict of Diocletian, by Col. Leake, London,
      1826. Col. Leake has not observed that this Edict is expressly
      named in the treatise de Mort. Persecut. ch. vii. Idem cum variis
      iniquitatibus immensam faceret caritatem, legem pretiis rerum
      venalium statuere conatus.—M]


      105 (return) [ Indicta lex nova quæ sane illorum temporum
      modestia tolerabilis, in perniciem processit. Aurel. Victor., who
      has treated the character of Diocletian with good sense, though
      in bad Latin.]


      It was in the twenty first year of his reign that Diocletian
      executed his memorable resolution of abdicating the empire; an
      action more naturally to have been expected from the elder or the
      younger Antoninus, than from a prince who had never practised the
      lessons of philosophy either in the attainment or in the use of
      supreme power. Diocletian acquired the glory of giving to the
      world the first example of a resignation, 106 which has not been
      very frequently imitated by succeeding monarchs. The parallel of
      Charles the Fifth, however, will naturally offer itself to our
      mind, not only since the eloquence of a modern historian has
      rendered that name so familiar to an English reader, but from the
      very striking resemblance between the characters of the two
      emperors, whose political abilities were superior to their
      military genius, and whose specious virtues were much less the
      effect of nature than of art. The abdication of Charles appears
      to have been hastened by the vicissitudes of fortune; and the
      disappointment of his favorite schemes urged him to relinquish a
      power which he found inadequate to his ambition. But the reign of
      Diocletian had flowed with a tide of uninterrupted success; nor
      was it till after he had vanquished all his enemies, and
      accomplished all his designs, that he seems to have entertained
      any serious thoughts of resigning the empire. Neither Charles nor
      Diocletian were arrived at a very advanced period of life; since
      the one was only fifty-five, and the other was no more than
      fifty-nine years of age; but the active life of those princes,
      their wars and journeys, the cares of royalty, and their
      application to business, had already impaired their constitution,
      and brought on the infirmities of a premature old age. 107


      106 (return) [ Solus omnium post conditum Romanum Imperium, qui
      extanto fastigio sponte ad privatæ vitæ statum civilitatemque
      remearet, Eutrop. ix. 28.]


      107 (return) [ The particulars of the journey and illness are
      taken from Laclantius, c. 17, who may sometimes be admitted as an
      evidence of public facts, though very seldom of private
      anecdotes.]


      Notwithstanding the severity of a very cold and rainy winter,
      Diocletian left Italy soon after the ceremony of his triumph, and
      began his progress towards the East round the circuit of the
      Illyrian provinces. From the inclemency of the weather, and the
      fatigue of the journey, he soon contracted a slow illness; and
      though he made easy marches, and was generally carried in a close
      litter, his disorder, before he arrived at Nicomedia, about the
      end of the summer, was become very serious and alarming. During
      the whole winter he was confined to his palace: his danger
      inspired a general and unaffected concern; but the people could
      only judge of the various alterations of his health, from the joy
      or consternation which they discovered in the countenances and
      behavior of his attendants. The rumor of his death was for some
      time universally believed, and it was supposed to be concealed
      with a view to prevent the troubles that might have happened
      during the absence of the Cæsar Galerius. At length, however, on
      the first of March, Diocletian once more appeared in public, but
      so pale and emaciated, that he could scarcely have been
      recognized by those to whom his person was the most familiar. It
      was time to put an end to the painful struggle, which he had
      sustained during more than a year, between the care of his health
      and that of his dignity. The former required indulgence and
      relaxation, the latter compelled him to direct, from the bed of
      sickness, the administration of a great empire. He resolved to
      pass the remainder of his days in honorable repose, to place his
      glory beyond the reach of fortune, and to relinquish the theatre
      of the world to his younger and more active associates. 108


      108 (return) [ Aurelius Victor ascribes the abdication, which had
      been so variously accounted for, to two causes: 1st, Diocletian’s
      contempt of ambition; and 2dly, His apprehension of impending
      troubles. One of the panegyrists (vi. 9) mentions the age and
      infirmities of Diocletian as a very natural reason for his
      retirement. * Note: Constantine (Orat. ad Sanct. c. 401) more
      than insinuated that derangement of mind, connected with the
      conflagration of the palace at Nicomedia by lightning, was the
      cause of his abdication. But Heinichen. in a very sensible note
      on this passage in Eusebius, while he admits that his long
      illness might produce a temporary depression of spirits,
      triumphantly appeals to the philosophical conduct of Diocletian
      in his retreat, and the influence which he still retained on
      public affairs.—M.]


      The ceremony of his abdication was performed in a spacious plain,
      about three miles from Nicomedia. The emperor ascended a lofty
      throne, and in a speech, full of reason and dignity, declared his
      intention, both to the people and to the soldiers who were
      assembled on this extraordinary occasion. As soon as he had
      divested himself of his purple, he withdrew from the gazing
      multitude; and traversing the city in a covered chariot,
      proceeded, without delay, to the favorite retirement which he had
      chosen in his native country of Dalmatia. On the same day, which
      was the first of May, 109 Maximian, as it had been previously
      concerted, made his resignation of the Imperial dignity at Milan.


      Even in the splendor of the Roman triumph, Diocletian had
      meditated his design of abdicating the government. As he wished
      to secure the obedience of Maximian, he exacted from him either a
      general assurance that he would submit his actions to the
      authority of his benefactor, or a particular promise that he
      would descend from the throne, whenever he should receive the
      advice and the example. This engagement, though it was confirmed
      by the solemnity of an oath before the altar of the Capitoline
      Jupiter, 110 would have proved a feeble restraint on the fierce
      temper of Maximian, whose passion was the love of power, and who
      neither desired present tranquility nor future reputation. But he
      yielded, however reluctantly, to the ascendant which his wiser
      colleague had acquired over him, and retired, immediately after
      his abdication, to a villa in Lucania, where it was almost
      impossible that such an impatient spirit could find any lasting
      tranquility.


      109 (return) [ The difficulties as well as mistakes attending the
      dates both of the year and of the day of Diocletian’s abdication
      are perfectly cleared up by Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom.
      iv. p 525, note 19, and by Pagi ad annum.]


      110 (return) [ See Panegyr. Veter. vi. 9. The oration was
      pronounced after Maximian had resumed the purple.]


      Diocletian, who, from a servile origin, had raised himself to the
      throne, passed the nine last years of his life in a private
      condition. Reason had dictated, and content seems to have
      accompanied, his retreat, in which he enjoyed, for a long time,
      the respect of those princes to whom he had resigned the
      possession of the world. 111 It is seldom that minds long
      exercised in business have formed any habits of conversing with
      themselves, and in the loss of power they principally regret the
      want of occupation. The amusements of letters and of devotion,
      which afford so many resources in solitude, were incapable of
      fixing the attention of Diocletian; but he had preserved, or at
      least he soon recovered, a taste for the most innocent as well as
      natural pleasures, and his leisure hours were sufficiently
      employed in building, planting, and gardening. His answer to
      Maximian is deservedly celebrated. He was solicited by that
      restless old man to reassume the reins of government, and the
      Imperial purple. He rejected the temptation with a smile of pity,
      calmly observing, that if he could show Maximian the cabbages
      which he had planted with his own hands at Salona, he should no
      longer be urged to relinquish the enjoyment of happiness for the
      pursuit of power. 112 In his conversations with his friends, he
      frequently acknowledged, that of all arts, the most difficult was
      the art of reigning; and he expressed himself on that favorite
      topic with a degree of warmth which could be the result only of
      experience. “How often,” was he accustomed to say, “is it the
      interest of four or five ministers to combine together to deceive
      their sovereign! Secluded from mankind by his exalted dignity,
      the truth is concealed from his knowledge; he can see only with
      their eyes, he hears nothing but their misrepresentations. He
      confers the most important offices upon vice and weakness, and
      disgraces the most virtuous and deserving among his subjects. By
      such infamous arts,” added Diocletian, “the best and wisest
      princes are sold to the venal corruption of their courtiers.” 113
      A just estimate of greatness, and the assurance of immortal fame,
      improve our relish for the pleasures of retirement; but the Roman
      emperor had filled too important a character in the world, to
      enjoy without alloy the comforts and security of a private
      condition. It was impossible that he could remain ignorant of the
      troubles which afflicted the empire after his abdication. It was
      impossible that he could be indifferent to their consequences.
      Fear, sorrow, and discontent, sometimes pursued him into the
      solitude of Salona. His tenderness, or at least his pride, was
      deeply wounded by the misfortunes of his wife and daughter; and
      the last moments of Diocletian were imbittered by some affronts,
      which Licinius and Constantine might have spared the father of so
      many emperors, and the first author of their own fortune. A
      report, though of a very doubtful nature, has reached our times,
      that he prudently withdrew himself from their power by a
      voluntary death. 114


      111 (return) [ Eumenius pays him a very fine compliment: “At enim
      divinum illum virum, qui primus imperium et participavit et
      posuit, consilii et fact isui non poenitet; nec amisisse se putat
      quod sponte transcripsit. Felix beatusque vere quem vestra,
      tantorum principum, colunt privatum.” Panegyr. Vet. vii. 15.]


      112 (return) [ We are obliged to the younger Victor for this
      celebrated item. Eutropius mentions the thing in a more general
      manner.]


      113 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 223, 224. Vopiscus had learned
      this conversation from his father.]


      114 (return) [ The younger Victor slightly mentions the report.
      But as Diocletian had disobliged a powerful and successful party,
      his memory has been loaded with every crime and misfortune. It
      has been affirmed that he died raving mad, that he was condemned
      as a criminal by the Roman senate, &c.]


      Before we dismiss the consideration of the life and character of
      Diocletian, we may, for a moment, direct our view to the place of
      his retirement. Salona, a principal city of his native province
      of Dalmatia, was near two hundred Roman miles (according to the
      measurement of the public highways) from Aquileia and the
      confines of Italy, and about two hundred and seventy from
      Sirmium, the usual residence of the emperors whenever they
      visited the Illyrian frontier. 115 A miserable village still
      preserves the name of Salona; but so late as the sixteenth
      century, the remains of a theatre, and a confused prospect of
      broken arches and marble columns, continued to attest its ancient
      splendor. 116 About six or seven miles from the city Diocletian
      constructed a magnificent palace, and we may infer, from the
      greatness of the work, how long he had meditated his design of
      abdicating the empire. The choice of a spot which united all that
      could contribute either to health or to luxury did not require
      the partiality of a native. “The soil was dry and fertile, the
      air is pure and wholesome, and, though extremely hot during the
      summer months, this country seldom feels those sultry and noxious
      winds to which the coasts of Istria and some parts of Italy are
      exposed. The views from the palace are no less beautiful than the
      soil and climate were inviting. Towards the west lies the fertile
      shore that stretches along the Adriatic, in which a number of
      small islands are scattered in such a manner as to give this part
      of the sea the appearance of a great lake. On the north side lies
      the bay, which led to the ancient city of Salona; and the country
      beyond it, appearing in sight, forms a proper contrast to that
      more extensive prospect of water, which the Adriatic presents
      both to the south and to the east. Towards the north, the view is
      terminated by high and irregular mountains, situated at a proper
      distance, and in many places covered with villages, woods, and
      vineyards.” 117


      115 (return) [ See the Itiner. p. 269, 272, edit. Wessel.]


      116 (return) [ The Abate Fortis, in his Viaggio in Dalmazia, p.
      43, (printed at Venice in the year 1774, in two small volumes in
      quarto,) quotes a Ms account of the antiquities of Salona,
      composed by Giambattista Giustiniani about the middle of the
      xvith century.]


      117 (return) [ Adam’s Antiquities of Diocletian’s Palace at
      Spalatro, p. 6. We may add a circumstance or two from the Abate
      Fortis: the little stream of the Hyader, mentioned by Lucan,
      produces most exquisite trout, which a sagacious writer, perhaps
      a monk, supposes to have been one of the principal reasons that
      determined Diocletian in the choice of his retirement. Fortis, p.
      45. The same author (p. 38) observes, that a taste for
      agriculture is reviving at Spalatro; and that an experimental
      farm has lately been established near the city, by a society of
      gentlemen.]


      Though Constantine, from a very obvious prejudice, affects to
      mention the palace of Diocletian with contempt, 118 yet one of
      their successors, who could only see it in a neglected and
      mutilated state, celebrates its magnificence in terms of the
      highest admiration. 119 It covered an extent of ground consisting
      of between nine and ten English acres. The form was quadrangular,
      flanked with sixteen towers. Two of the sides were near six
      hundred, and the other two near seven hundred feet in length. The
      whole was constructed of a beautiful freestone, extracted from
      the neighboring quarries of Trau, or Tragutium, and very little
      inferior to marble itself. Four streets, intersecting each other
      at right angles, divided the several parts of this great edifice,
      and the approach to the principal apartment was from a very
      stately entrance, which is still denominated the Golden Gate. The
      approach was terminated by a _peristylium_ of granite columns, on
      one side of which we discover the square temple of Æsculapius, on
      the other the octagon temple of Jupiter. The latter of those
      deities Diocletian revered as the patron of his fortunes, the
      former as the protector of his health. By comparing the present
      remains with the precepts of Vitruvius, the several parts of the
      building, the baths, bedchamber, the _atrium_, the _basilica_,
      and the Cyzicene, Corinthian, and Egyptian halls have been
      described with some degree of precision, or at least of
      probability. Their forms were various, their proportions just;
      but they all were attended with two imperfections, very repugnant
      to our modern notions of taste and conveniency. These stately
      rooms had neither windows nor chimneys. They were lighted from
      the top, (for the building seems to have consisted of no more
      than one story,) and they received their heat by the help of
      pipes that were conveyed along the walls. The range of principal
      apartments was protected towards the south-west by a portico five
      hundred and seventeen feet long, which must have formed a very
      noble and delightful walk, when the beauties of painting and
      sculpture were added to those of the prospect.


      118 (return) [ Constantin. Orat. ad Coetum Sanct. c. 25. In this
      sermon, the emperor, or the bishop who composed it for him,
      affects to relate the miserable end of all the persecutors of the
      church.]


      119 (return) [ Constantin. Porphyr. de Statu Imper. p. 86.]


      Had this magnificent edifice remained in a solitary country, it
      would have been exposed to the ravages of time; but it might,
      perhaps, have escaped the rapacious industry of man. The village
      of Aspalathus, 120 and, long afterwards, the provincial town of
      Spalatro, have grown out of its ruins. The Golden Gate now opens
      into the market-place. St. John the Baptist has usurped the
      honors of Æsculapius; and the temple of Jupiter, under the
      protection of the Virgin, is converted into the cathedral church.


      For this account of Diocletian’s palace we are principally
      indebted to an ingenious artist of our own time and country, whom
      a very liberal curiosity carried into the heart of Dalmatia. 121
      But there is room to suspect that the elegance of his designs and
      engraving has somewhat flattered the objects which it was their
      purpose to represent. We are informed by a more recent and very
      judicious traveller, that the awful ruins of Spalatro are not
      less expressive of the decline of the art than of the greatness
      of the Roman empire in the time of Diocletian. 122 If such was
      indeed the state of architecture, we must naturally believe that
      painting and sculpture had experienced a still more sensible
      decay. The practice of architecture is directed by a few general
      and even mechanical rules. But sculpture, and, above all,
      painting, propose to themselves the imitation not only of the
      forms of nature, but of the characters and passions of the human
      soul. In those sublime arts the dexterity of the hand is of
      little avail, unless it is animated by fancy, and guided by the
      most correct taste and observation.


      120 (return) [ D’Anville, Geographie Ancienne, tom. i. p. 162.]


      121 (return) [ Messieurs Adam and Clerisseau, attended by two
      draughtsmen visited Spalatro in the month of July, 1757. The
      magnificent work which their journey produced was published in
      London seven years afterwards.]


      122 (return) [ I shall quote the words of the Abate Fortis.
      “E’bastevolmente agli amatori dell’ Architettura, e dell’
      Antichita, l’opera del Signor Adams, che a donato molto a que’
      superbi vestigi coll’abituale eleganza del suo toccalapis e del
      bulino. In generale la rozzezza del scalpello, e’l cattivo gusto
      del secolo vi gareggiano colla magnificenz del fabricato.” See
      Viaggio in Dalmazia, p. 40.]


      It is almost unnecessary to remark, that the civil distractions
      of the empire, the license of the soldiers, the inroads of the
      barbarians, and the progress of despotism, had proved very
      unfavorable to genius, and even to learning. The succession of
      Illyrian princes restored the empire without restoring the
      sciences. Their military education was not calculated to inspire
      them with the love of letters; and even the mind of Diocletian,
      however active and capacious in business, was totally uninformed
      by study or speculation. The professions of law and physic are of
      such common use and certain profit that they will always secure a
      sufficient number of practitioners endowed with a reasonable
      degree of abilities and knowledge; but it does not appear that
      the students in those two faculties appeal to any celebrated
      masters who have flourished within that period. The voice of
      poetry was silent. History was reduced to dry and confused
      abridgments, alike destitute of amusement and instruction. A
      languid and affected eloquence was still retained in the pay and
      service of the emperors, who encouraged not any arts except those
      which contributed to the gratification of their pride, or the
      defence of their power. 123


      123 (return) [ The orator Eumenius was secretary to the emperors
      Maximian and Constantius, and Professor of Rhetoric in the
      college of Autun. His salary was six hundred thousand sesterces,
      which, according to the lowest computation of that age, must have
      exceeded three thousand pounds a year. He generously requested
      the permission of employing it in rebuilding the college. See his
      Oration De Restaurandis Scholis; which, though not exempt from
      vanity, may atone for his panegyrics.]


      The declining age of learning and of mankind is marked, however,
      by the rise and rapid progress of the new Platonists. The school
      of Alexandria silenced those of Athens; and the ancient sects
      enrolled themselves under the banners of the more fashionable
      teachers, who recommended their system by the novelty of their
      method, and the austerity of their manners. Several of these
      masters, Ammonius, Plotinus, Amelius, and Porphyry, 124 were men
      of profound thought and intense application; but by mistaking the
      true object of philosophy, their labors contributed much less to
      improve than to corrupt the human understanding. The knowledge
      that is suited to our situation and powers, the whole compass of
      moral, natural, and mathematical science, was neglected by the
      new Platonists; whilst they exhausted their strength in the
      verbal disputes of metaphysics, attempted to explore the secrets
      of the invisible world, and studied to reconcile Aristotle with
      Plato, on subjects of which both these philosophers were as
      ignorant as the rest of mankind. Consuming their reason in these
      deep but unsubstantial meditations, their minds were exposed to
      illusions of fancy. They flattered themselves that they possessed
      the secret of disengaging the soul from its corporal prison;
      claimed a familiar intercourse with demons and spirits; and, by a
      very singular revolution, converted the study of philosophy into
      that of magic. The ancient sages had derided the popular
      superstition; after disguising its extravagance by the thin
      pretence of allegory, the disciples of Plotinus and Porphyry
      became its most zealous defenders. As they agreed with the
      Christians in a few mysterious points of faith, they attacked the
      remainder of their theological system with all the fury of civil
      war. The new Platonists would scarcely deserve a place in the
      history of science, but in that of the church the mention of them
      will very frequently occur.


      124 (return) [Porphyry died about the time of Diocletian’s
      abdication. The life of his master Plotinus, which he composed,
      will give us the most complete idea of the genius of the sect,
      and the manners of its professors. This very curious piece is
      inserted in Fabricius Bibliotheca Græca tom. iv. p. 88—148.]


      Chapter XIV: Six Emperors At The Same Time, Reunion Of The
      Empire.—Part I.


Troubles After The Abdication Of Diocletian.—Death Of
Constantius.—Elevation Of Constantine And Maxen Tius.—Six Emperors At
The Same Time.—Death Of Maximian And Galerius.—Victories Of Constantine
Over Maxentius And Licinus.—Reunion Of The Empire Under The Authority
Of Constantine.


      The balance of power established by Diocletian subsisted no
      longer than while it was sustained by the firm and dexterous hand
      of the founder. It required such a fortunate mixture of different
      tempers and abilities as could scarcely be found or even expected
      a second time; two emperors without jealousy, two Cæsars without
      ambition, and the same general interest invariably pursued by
      four independent princes. The abdication of Diocletian and
      Maximian was succeeded by eighteen years of discord and
      confusion. The empire was afflicted by five civil wars; and the
      remainder of the time was not so much a state of tranquillity as
      a suspension of arms between several hostile monarchs, who,
      viewing each other with an eye of fear and hatred, strove to
      increase their respective forces at the expense of their
      subjects.


      As soon as Diocletian and Maximian had resigned the purple, their
      station, according to the rules of the new constitution, was
      filled by the two Cæsars, Constantius and Galerius, who
      immediately assumed the title of Augustus. 1


      1 (return) [ M. de Montesquieu (Considerations sur la Grandeur et
      La Decadence des Romains, c. 17) supposes, on the authority of
      Orosius and Eusebius, that, on this occasion, the empire, for the
      first time, was really divided into two parts. It is difficult,
      however, to discover in what respect the plan of Galerius
      differed from that of Diocletian.]


      The honors of seniority and precedence were allowed to the former
      of those princes, and he continued under a new appellation to
      administer his ancient department of Gaul, Spain, and Britain.


      The government of those ample provinces was sufficient to
      exercise his talents and to satisfy his ambition. Clemency,
      temperance, and moderation, distinguished the amiable character
      of Constantius, and his fortunate subjects had frequently
      occasion to compare the virtues of their sovereign with the
      passions of Maximian, and even with the arts of Diocletian. 2
      Instead of imitating their eastern pride and magnificence,
      Constantius preserved the modesty of a Roman prince. He declared,
      with unaffected sincerity, that his most valued treasure was in
      the hearts of his people, and that, whenever the dignity of the
      throne, or the danger of the state, required any extraordinary
      supply, he could depend with confidence on their gratitude and
      liberality. 3 The provincials of Gaul, Spain, and Britain,
      sensible of his worth, and of their own happiness, reflected with
      anxiety on the declining health of the emperor Constantius, and
      the tender age of his numerous family, the issue of his second
      marriage with the daughter of Maximian.


      2 (return) [ Hic non modo amabilis, sed etiam venerabilis Gallis
      fuit; præcipuc quod Diocletiani suspectam prudentiam, et
      Maximiani sanguinariam violentiam imperio ejus evaserant. Eutrop.
      Breviar. x. i.]


      3 (return) [ Divitiis Provincialium (mel. provinciarum) ac
      privatorum studens, fisci commoda non admodum affectans;
      ducensque melius publicas opes a privatis haberi, quam intra unum
      claustrum reservari. Id. ibid. He carried this maxim so far, that
      whenever he gave an entertainment, he was obliged to borrow a
      service of plate.]


      The stern temper of Galerius was cast in a very different mould;
      and while he commanded the esteem of his subjects, he seldom
      condescended to solicit their affections. His fame in arms, and,
      above all, the success of the Persian war, had elated his haughty
      mind, which was naturally impatient of a superior, or even of an
      equal. If it were possible to rely on the partial testimony of an
      injudicious writer, we might ascribe the abdication of Diocletian
      to the menaces of Galerius, and relate the particulars of a
      _private_ conversation between the two princes, in which the
      former discovered as much pusillanimity as the latter displayed
      ingratitude and arrogance. 4 But these obscure anecdotes are
      sufficiently refuted by an impartial view of the character and
      conduct of Diocletian. Whatever might otherwise have been his
      intentions, if he had apprehended any danger from the violence of
      Galerius, his good sense would have instructed him to prevent the
      ignominious contest; and as he had held the sceptre with glory,
      he would have resigned it without disgrace.


      4 (return) [ Lactantius de Mort. Persecutor. c. 18. Were the
      particulars of this conference more consistent with truth and
      decency, we might still ask how they came to the knowledge of an
      obscure rhetorician. But there are many historians who put us in
      mind of the admirable saying of the great Conde to Cardinal de
      Retz: “Ces coquins nous font parlor et agir, comme ils auroient
      fait eux-memes a notre place.” * Note: This attack upon
      Lactantius is unfounded. Lactantius was so far from having been
      an obscure rhetorician, that he had taught rhetoric publicly, and
      with the greatest success, first in Africa, and afterwards in
      Nicomedia. His reputation obtained him the esteem of Constantine,
      who invited him to his court, and intrusted to him the education
      of his son Crispus. The facts which he relates took place during
      his own time; he cannot be accused of dishonesty or imposture.
      Satis me vixisse arbitrabor et officium hominis implesse si labor
      meus aliquos homines, ab erroribus iberatos, ad iter coeleste
      direxerit. De Opif. Dei, cap. 20. The eloquence of Lactantius has
      caused him to be called the Christian Cicero. Annon Gent.—G.
      ——Yet no unprejudiced person can read this coarse and particular
      private conversation of the two emperors, without assenting to
      the justice of Gibbon’s severe sentence. But the authorship of
      the treatise is by no means certain. The fame of Lactantius for
      eloquence as well as for truth, would suffer no loss if it should
      be adjudged to some more “obscure rhetorician.” Manso, in his
      Leben Constantins des Grossen, concurs on this point with Gibbon
      Beylage, iv. —M.]


      After the elevation of Constantius and Galerius to the rank of
      _Augusti_, two new _Cæsars_ were required to supply their place,
      and to complete the system of the Imperial government. Diocletian
      was sincerely desirous of withdrawing himself from the world; he
      considered Galerius, who had married his daughter, as the firmest
      support of his family and of the empire; and he consented,
      without reluctance, that his successor should assume the merit as
      well as the envy of the important nomination. It was fixed
      without consulting the interest or inclination of the princes of
      the West. Each of them had a son who was arrived at the age of
      manhood, and who might have been deemed the most natural
      candidates for the vacant honor. But the impotent resentment of
      Maximian was no longer to be dreaded; and the moderate
      Constantius, though he might despise the dangers, was humanely
      apprehensive of the calamities, of civil war. The two persons
      whom Galerius promoted to the rank of Cæsar were much better
      suited to serve the views of his ambition; and their principal
      recommendation seems to have consisted in the want of merit or
      personal consequence. The first of these was Daza, or, as he was
      afterwards called, Maximin, whose mother was the sister of
      Galerius. The unexperienced youth still betrayed, by his manners
      and language, his rustic education, when, to his own
      astonishment, as well as that of the world, he was invested by
      Diocletian with the purple, exalted to the dignity of Cæsar, and
      intrusted with the sovereign command of Egypt and Syria. 5 At the
      same time, Severus, a faithful servant, addicted to pleasure, but
      not incapable of business, was sent to Milan, to receive, from
      the reluctant hands of Maximian, the Cæsarian ornaments, and the
      possession of Italy and Africa. According to the forms of the
      constitution, Severus acknowledged the supremacy of the western
      emperor; but he was absolutely devoted to the commands of his
      benefactor Galerius, who, reserving to himself the intermediate
      countries from the confines of Italy to those of Syria, firmly
      established his power over three fourths of the monarchy. In the
      full confidence that the approaching death of Constantius would
      leave him sole master of the Roman world, we are assured that he
      had arranged in his mind a long succession of future princes, and
      that he meditated his own retreat from public life, after he
      should have accomplished a glorious reign of about twenty years.
      6 7


      5 (return) [ Sublatus nuper a pecoribus et silvis (says
      Lactantius de M. P. c. 19) statim Scutarius, continuo Protector,
      mox Tribunus, postridie Cæsar, accepit Orientem. Aurelius Victor
      is too liberal in giving him the whole portion of Diocletian.]


      6 (return) [ His diligence and fidelity are acknowledged even by
      Lactantius, de M. P. c. 18.]


      7 (return) [ These schemes, however, rest only on the very
      doubtful authority of Lactantius de M. P. c. 20.]


      But within less than eighteen months, two unexpected revolutions
      overturned the ambitious schemes of Galerius. The hopes of
      uniting the western provinces to his empire were disappointed by
      the elevation of Constantine, whilst Italy and Africa were lost
      by the successful revolt of Maxentius.


      I. The fame of Constantine has rendered posterity attentive to
      the most minute circumstances of his life and actions. The place
      of his birth, as well as the condition of his mother Helena, have
      been the subject, not only of literary, but of national disputes.
      Notwithstanding the recent tradition, which assigns for her
      father a British king, 8 we are obliged to confess, that Helena
      was the daughter of an innkeeper; but at the same time, we may
      defend the legality of her marriage, against those who have
      represented her as the concubine of Constantius. 9 The great
      Constantine was most probably born at Naissus, in Dacia; 10 and
      it is not surprising that, in a family and province distinguished
      only by the profession of arms, the youth should discover very
      little inclination to improve his mind by the acquisition of
      knowledge. 11 He was about eighteen years of age when his father
      was promoted to the rank of Cæsar; but that fortunate event was
      attended with his mother’s divorce; and the splendor of an
      Imperial alliance reduced the son of Helena to a state of
      disgrace and humiliation. Instead of following Constantius in the
      West, he remained in the service of Diocletian, signalized his
      valor in the wars of Egypt and Persia, and gradually rose to the
      honorable station of a tribune of the first order. The figure of
      Constantine was tall and majestic; he was dexterous in all his
      exercises, intrepid in war, affable in peace; in his whole
      conduct, the active spirit of youth was tempered by habitual
      prudence; and while his mind was engrossed by ambition, he
      appeared cold and insensible to the allurements of pleasure. The
      favor of the people and soldiers, who had named him as a worthy
      candidate for the rank of Cæsar, served only to exasperate the
      jealousy of Galerius; and though prudence might restrain him from
      exercising any open violence, an absolute monarch is seldom at a
      loss how to execute a sure and secret revenge. 12 Every hour
      increased the danger of Constantine, and the anxiety of his
      father, who, by repeated letters, expressed the warmest desire of
      embracing his son. For some time the policy of Galerius supplied
      him with delays and excuses; but it was impossible long to refuse
      so natural a request of his associate, without maintaining his
      refusal by arms. The permission of the journey was reluctantly
      granted, and whatever precautions the emperor might have taken to
      intercept a return, the consequences of which he, with so much
      reason, apprehended, they were effectually disappointed by the
      incredible diligence of Constantine. 13 Leaving the palace of
      Nicomedia in the night, he travelled post through Bithynia,
      Thrace, Dacia, Pannonia, Italy, and Gaul, and, amidst the joyful
      acclamations of the people, reached the port of Boulogne in the
      very moment when his father was preparing to embark for Britain.
      14


      8 (return) [ This tradition, unknown to the contemporaries of
      Constantine was invented in the darkness of monestaries, was
      embellished by Jeffrey of Monmouth, and the writers of the xiith
      century, has been defended by our antiquarians of the last age,
      and is seriously related in the ponderous History of England,
      compiled by Mr. Carte, (vol. i. p. 147.) He transports, however,
      the kingdom of Coil, the imaginary father of Helena, from Essex
      to the wall of Antoninus.]


      9 (return) [ Eutropius (x. 2) expresses, in a few words, the real
      truth, and the occasion of the error “ex obscuriori matrimonio
      ejus filius.” Zosimus (l. ii. p. 78) eagerly seized the most
      unfavorable report, and is followed by Orosius, (vii. 25,) whose
      authority is oddly enough overlooked by the indefatigable, but
      partial Tillemont. By insisting on the divorce of Helena,
      Diocletian acknowledged her marriage.]


      10 (return) [ There are three opinions with regard to the place
      of Constantine’s birth. 1. Our English antiquarians were used to
      dwell with rapture on the words of his panegyrist, “Britannias
      illic oriendo nobiles fecisti.” But this celebrated passage may
      be referred with as much propriety to the accession, as to the
      nativity of Constantine. 2. Some of the modern Greeks have
      ascribed the honor of his birth to Drepanum, a town on the Gulf
      of Nicomedia, (Cellarius, tom. ii. p. 174,) which Constantine
      dignified with the name of Helenopolis, and Justinian adorned
      with many splendid buildings, (Procop. de Edificiis, v. 2.) It is
      indeed probable enough, that Helena’s father kept an inn at
      Drepanum, and that Constantius might lodge there when he returned
      from a Persian embassy, in the reign of Aurelian. But in the
      wandering life of a soldier, the place of his marriage, and the
      places where his children are born, have very little connection
      with each other. 3. The claim of Naissus is supported by the
      anonymous writer, published at the end of Ammianus, p. 710, and
      who in general copied very good materials; and it is confirmed by
      Julius Firmicus, (de Astrologia, l. i. c. 4,) who flourished
      under the reign of Constantine himself. Some objections have been
      raised against the integrity of the text, and the application of
      the passage of Firmicus but the former is established by the best
      Mss., and the latter is very ably defended by Lipsius de
      Magnitudine Romana, l. iv. c. 11, et Supplement.]


      11 (return) [ Literis minus instructus. Anonym. ad Ammian. p.
      710.]


      12 (return) [ Galerius, or perhaps his own courage, exposed him
      to single combat with a Sarmatian, (Anonym. p. 710,) and with a
      monstrous lion. See Praxagoras apud Photium, p. 63. Praxagoras,
      an Athenian philosopher, had written a life of Constantine in two
      books, which are now lost. He was a contemporary.]


      13 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 78, 79. Lactantius de M. P. c.
      24. The former tells a very foolish story, that Constantine
      caused all the post-horses which he had used to be hamstrung.
      Such a bloody execution, without preventing a pursuit, would have
      scattered suspicions, and might have stopped his journey. * Note:
      Zosimus is not the only writer who tells this story. The younger
      Victor confirms it. Ad frustrandos insequentes, publica jumenta,
      quaqua iter ageret, interficiens. Aurelius Victor de Cæsar says
      the same thing, G. as also the Anonymus Valesii.— M. ——Manso,
      (Leben Constantins,) p. 18, observes that the story has been
      exaggerated; he took this precaution during the first stage of
      his journey.—M.]


      14 (return) [ Anonym. p. 710. Panegyr. Veter. vii. 4. But
      Zosimus, l. ii. p. 79, Eusebius de Vit. Constant. l. i. c. 21,
      and Lactantius de M. P. c. 24. suppose, with less accuracy, that
      he found his father on his death-bed.]


      The British expedition, and an easy victory over the barbarians
      of Caledonia, were the last exploits of the reign of Constantius.
      He ended his life in the Imperial palace of York, fifteen months
      after he had received the title of Augustus, and almost fourteen
      years and a half after he had been promoted to the rank of Cæsar.
      His death was immediately succeeded by the elevation of
      Constantine. The ideas of inheritance and succession are so very
      familiar, that the generality of mankind consider them as founded
      not only in reason but in nature itself. Our imagination readily
      transfers the same principles from private property to public
      dominion: and whenever a virtuous father leaves behind him a son
      whose merit seems to justify the esteem, or even the hopes, of
      the people, the joint influence of prejudice and of affection
      operates with irresistible weight. The flower of the western
      armies had followed Constantius into Britain, and the national
      troops were reënforced by a numerous body of Alemanni, who obeyed
      the orders of Crocus, one of their hereditary chieftains. 15 The
      opinion of their own importance, and the assurance that Britain,
      Gaul, and Spain would acquiesce in their nomination, were
      diligently inculcated to the legions by the adherents of
      Constantine. The soldiers were asked, whether they could hesitate
      a moment between the honor of placing at their head the worthy
      son of their beloved emperor, and the ignominy of tamely
      expecting the arrival of some obscure stranger, on whom it might
      please the sovereign of Asia to bestow the armies and provinces
      of the West. It was insinuated to them, that gratitude and
      liberality held a distinguished place among the virtues of
      Constantine; nor did that artful prince show himself to the
      troops, till they were prepared to salute him with the names of
      Augustus and Emperor. The throne was the object of his desires;
      and had he been less actuated by ambition, it was his only means
      of safety. He was well acquainted with the character and
      sentiments of Galerius, and sufficiently apprised, that if he
      wished to live he must determine to reign. The decent and even
      obstinate resistance which he chose to affect, 16 was contrived
      to justify his usurpation; nor did he yield to the acclamations
      of the army, till he had provided the proper materials for a
      letter, which he immediately despatched to the emperor of the
      East. Constantine informed him of the melancholy event of his
      father’s death, modestly asserted his natural claim to the
      succession, and respectfully lamented, that the affectionate
      violence of his troops had not permitted him to solicit the
      Imperial purple in the regular and constitutional manner. The
      first emotions of Galerius were those of surprise,
      disappointment, and rage; and as he could seldom restrain his
      passions, he loudly threatened, that he would commit to the
      flames both the letter and the messenger. But his resentment
      insensibly subsided; and when he recollected the doubtful chance
      of war, when he had weighed the character and strength of his
      adversary, he consented to embrace the honorable accommodation
      which the prudence of Constantine had left open to him. Without
      either condemning or ratifying the choice of the British army,
      Galerius accepted the son of his deceased colleague as the
      sovereign of the provinces beyond the Alps; but he gave him only
      the title of Cæsar, and the fourth rank among the Roman princes,
      whilst he conferred the vacant place of Augustus on his favorite
      Severus. The apparent harmony of the empire was still preserved,
      and Constantine, who already possessed the substance, expected,
      without impatience, an opportunity of obtaining the honors, of
      supreme power. 17


      15 (return) [ Cunctis qui aderant, annitentibus, sed præcipue
      Croco (alii Eroco) [Erich?] Alamannorum Rege, auxilii gratia
      Constantium comitato, imperium capit. Victor Junior, c. 41. This
      is perhaps the first instance of a barbarian king, who assisted
      the Roman arms with an independent body of his own subjects. The
      practice grew familiar and at last became fatal.]


      16 (return) [ His panegyrist Eumenius (vii. 8) ventures to affirm
      in the presence of Constantine, that he put spurs to his horse,
      and tried, but in vain, to escape from the hands of his
      soldiers.]


      17 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 25. Eumenius (vii. 8.) gives
      a rhetorical turn to the whole transaction.]


      The children of Constantius by his second marriage were six in
      number, three of either sex, and whose Imperial descent might
      have solicited a preference over the meaner extraction of the son
      of Helena. But Constantine was in the thirty-second year of his
      age, in the full vigor both of mind and body, at the time when
      the eldest of his brothers could not possibly be more than
      thirteen years old. His claim of superior merit had been allowed
      and ratified by the dying emperor. 18 In his last moments
      Constantius bequeathed to his eldest son the care of the safety
      as well as greatness of the family; conjuring him to assume both
      the authority and the sentiments of a father with regard to the
      children of Theodora. Their liberal education, advantageous
      marriages, the secure dignity of their lives, and the first
      honors of the state with which they were invested, attest the
      fraternal affection of Constantine; and as those princes
      possessed a mild and grateful disposition, they submitted without
      reluctance to the superiority of his genius and fortune. 19


      18 (return) [ The choice of Constantine, by his dying father,
      which is warranted by reason, and insinuated by Eumenius, seems
      to be confirmed by the most unexceptionable authority, the
      concurring evidence of Lactantius (de M. P. c. 24) and of
      Libanius, (Oratio i.,) of Eusebius (in Vit. Constantin. l. i. c.
      18, 21) and of Julian, (Oratio i)]


      19 (return) [ Of the three sisters of Constantine, Constantia
      married the emperor Licinius, Anastasia the Cæsar Bassianus, and
      Eutropia the consul Nepotianus. The three brothers were,
      Dalmatius, Julius Constantius, and Annibalianus, of whom we shall
      have occasion to speak hereafter.]


      II. The ambitious spirit of Galerius was scarcely reconciled to
      the disappointment of his views upon the Gallic provinces, before
      the unexpected loss of Italy wounded his pride as well as power
      in a still more sensible part. The long absence of the emperors
      had filled Rome with discontent and indignation; and the people
      gradually discovered, that the preference given to Nicomedia and
      Milan was not to be ascribed to the particular inclination of
      Diocletian, but to the permanent form of government which he had
      instituted. It was in vain that, a few months after his
      abdication, his successors dedicated, under his name, those
      magnificent baths, whose ruins still supply the ground as well as
      the materials for so many churches and convents. 20 The
      tranquility of those elegant recesses of ease and luxury was
      disturbed by the impatient murmurs of the Romans, and a report
      was insensibly circulated, that the sums expended in erecting
      those buildings would soon be required at their hands. About that
      time the avarice of Galerius, or perhaps the exigencies of the
      state, had induced him to make a very strict and rigorous
      inquisition into the property of his subjects, for the purpose of
      a general taxation, both on their lands and on their persons. A
      very minute survey appears to have been taken of their real
      estates; and wherever there was the slightest suspicion of
      concealment, torture was very freely employed to obtain a sincere
      declaration of their personal wealth. 21 The privileges which had
      exalted Italy above the rank of the provinces were no longer
      regarded: 211 and the officers of the revenue already began to
      number the Roman people, and to settle the proportion of the new
      taxes. Even when the spirit of freedom had been utterly
      extinguished, the tamest subjects have sometimes ventured to
      resist an unprecedented invasion of their property; but on this
      occasion the injury was aggravated by the insult, and the sense
      of private interest was quickened by that of national honor. The
      conquest of Macedonia, as we have already observed, had delivered
      the Roman people from the weight of personal taxes.


      Though they had experienced every form of despotism, they had now
      enjoyed that exemption near five hundred years; nor could they
      patiently brook the insolence of an Illyrian peasant, who, from
      his distant residence in Asia, presumed to number Rome among the
      tributary cities of his empire. The rising fury of the people was
      encouraged by the authority, or at least the connivance, of the
      senate; and the feeble remains of the Prætorian guards, who had
      reason to apprehend their own dissolution, embraced so honorable
      a pretence, and declared their readiness to draw their swords in
      the service of their oppressed country. It was the wish, and it
      soon became the hope, of every citizen, that after expelling from
      Italy their foreign tyrants, they should elect a prince who, by
      the place of his residence, and by his maxims of government,
      might once more deserve the title of Roman emperor. The name, as
      well as the situation, of Maxentius determined in his favor the
      popular enthusiasm.


      20 (return) [ See Gruter. Inscrip. p. 178. The six princes are
      all mentioned, Diocletian and Maximian as the senior Augusti, and
      fathers of the emperors. They jointly dedicate, for the use of
      their own Romans, this magnificent edifice. The architects have
      delineated the ruins of these Thermoe, and the antiquarians,
      particularly Donatus and Nardini, have ascertained the ground
      which they covered. One of the great rooms is now the Carthusian
      church; and even one of the porter’s lodges is sufficient to form
      another church, which belongs to the Feuillans.]


      21 (return) [ See Lactantius de M. P. c. 26, 31. ]


      211 (return) [ Saviguy, in his memoir on Roman taxation, (Mem.
      Berl. Academ. 1822, 1823, p. 5,) dates from this period the
      abolition of the Jus Italicum. He quotes a remarkable passage of
      Aurelius Victor. Hinc denique parti Italiæ invec tum tributorum
      ingens malum. Aur. Vict. c. 39. It was a necessary consequence of
      the division of the empire: it became impossible to maintain a
      second court and executive, and leave so large and fruitful a
      part of the territory exempt from contribution.—M.]


      Maxentius was the son of the emperor Maximian, and he had married
      the daughter of Galerius. His birth and alliance seemed to offer
      him the fairest promise of succeeding to the empire; but his
      vices and incapacity procured him the same exclusion from the
      dignity of Cæsar, which Constantine had deserved by a dangerous
      superiority of merit. The policy of Galerius preferred such
      associates as would never disgrace the choice, nor dispute the
      commands, of their benefactor. An obscure stranger was therefore
      raised to the throne of Italy, and the son of the late emperor of
      the West was left to enjoy the luxury of a private fortune in a
      villa a few miles distant from the capital. The gloomy passions
      of his soul, shame, vexation, and rage, were inflamed by envy on
      the news of Constantine’s success; but the hopes of Maxentius
      revived with the public discontent, and he was easily persuaded
      to unite his personal injury and pretensions with the cause of
      the Roman people. Two Prætorian tribunes and a commissary of
      provisions undertook the management of the conspiracy; and as
      every order of men was actuated by the same spirit, the immediate
      event was neither doubtful nor difficult. The præfect of the
      city, and a few magistrates, who maintained their fidelity to
      Severus, were massacred by the guards; and Maxentius, invested
      with the Imperial ornaments, was acknowledged by the applauding
      senate and people as the protector of the Roman freedom and
      dignity. It is uncertain whether Maximian was previously
      acquainted with the conspiracy; but as soon as the standard of
      rebellion was erected at Rome, the old emperor broke from the
      retirement where the authority of Diocletian had condemned him to
      pass a life of melancholy and solitude, and concealed his
      returning ambition under the disguise of paternal tenderness. At
      the request of his son and of the senate, he condescended to
      reassume the purple. His ancient dignity, his experience, and his
      fame in arms, added strength as well as reputation to the party
      of Maxentius. 22


      22 (return) [ The sixth Panegyric represents the conduct of
      Maximian in the most favorable light, and the ambiguous
      expression of Aurelius Victor, “retractante diu,” may signify
      either that he contrived, or that he opposed, the conspiracy. See
      Zosimus, l. ii. p. 79, and Lactantius de M. P. c. 26.]


      According to the advice, or rather the orders, of his colleague,
      the emperor Severus immediately hastened to Rome, in the full
      confidence, that, by his unexpected celerity, he should easily
      suppress the tumult of an unwarlike populace, commanded by a
      licentious youth. But he found on his arrival the gates of the
      city shut against him, the walls filled with men and arms, an
      experienced general at the head of the rebels, and his own troops
      without spirit or affection. A large body of Moors deserted to
      the enemy, allured by the promise of a large donative; and, if it
      be true that they had been levied by Maximian in his African war,
      preferring the natural feelings of gratitude to the artificial
      ties of allegiance. Anulinus, the Prætorian præfect, declared
      himself in favor of Maxentius, and drew after him the most
      considerable part of the troops, accustomed to obey his commands.


      Rome, according to the expression of an orator, recalled her
      armies; and the unfortunate Severus, destitute of force and of
      counsel, retired, or rather fled, with precipitation, to Ravenna.


      Here he might for some time have been safe. The fortifications of
      Ravenna were able to resist the attempts, and the morasses that
      surrounded the town were sufficient to prevent the approach, of
      the Italian army. The sea, which Severus commanded with a
      powerful fleet, secured him an inexhaustible supply of
      provisions, and gave a free entrance to the legions, which, on
      the return of spring, would advance to his assistance from
      Illyricum and the East. Maximian, who conducted the siege in
      person, was soon convinced that he might waste his time and his
      army in the fruitless enterprise, and that he had nothing to hope
      either from force or famine. With an art more suitable to the
      character of Diocletian than to his own, he directed his attack,
      not so much against the walls of Ravenna, as against the mind of
      Severus. The treachery which he had experienced disposed that
      unhappy prince to distrust the most sincere of his friends and
      adherents. The emissaries of Maximian easily persuaded his
      credulity, that a conspiracy was formed to betray the town, and
      prevailed upon his fears not to expose himself to the discretion
      of an irritated conqueror, but to accept the faith of an
      honorable capitulation. He was at first received with humanity
      and treated with respect. Maximian conducted the captive emperor
      to Rome, and gave him the most solemn assurances that he had
      secured his life by the resignation of the purple. But Severus
      could obtain only an easy death and an Imperial funeral. When the
      sentence was signified to him, the manner of executing it was
      left to his own choice; he preferred the favorite mode of the
      ancients, that of opening his veins; and as soon as he expired,
      his body was carried to the sepulchre which had been constructed
      for the family of Gallienus. 23


      23 (return) [ The circumstances of this war, and the death of
      Severus, are very doubtfully and variously told in our ancient
      fragments, (see Tillemont, Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iv. part i.
      p. 555.) I have endeavored to extract from them a consistent and
      probable narration. * Note: Manso justly observes that two
      totally different narratives might be formed, almost upon equal
      authority. Beylage, iv.—M.]


      Chapter XIV: Six Emperors At The Same Time, Reunion Of The
      Empire.—Part II.


      Though the characters of Constantine and Maxentius had very
      little affinity with each other, their situation and interest
      were the same; and prudence seemed to require that they should
      unite their forces against the common enemy. Notwithstanding the
      superiority of his age and dignity, the indefatigable Maximian
      passed the Alps, and, courting a personal interview with the
      sovereign of Gaul, carried with him his daughter Fausta as the
      pledge of the new alliance. The marriage was celebrated at Arles
      with every circumstance of magnificence; and the ancient
      colleague of Diocletian, who again asserted his claim to the
      Western empire, conferred on his son-in-law and ally the title of
      Augustus. By consenting to receive that honor from Maximian,
      Constantine seemed to embrace the cause of Rome and of the
      senate; but his professions were ambiguous, and his assistance
      slow and ineffectual. He considered with attention the
      approaching contest between the masters of Italy and the emperor
      of the East, and was prepared to consult his own safety or
      ambition in the event of the war. 24


      24 (return) [ The sixth Panegyric was pronounced to celebrate the
      elevation of Constantine; but the prudent orator avoids the
      mention either of Galerius or of Maxentius. He introduces only
      one slight allusion to the actual troubles, and to the majesty of
      Rome. * Note: Compare Manso, Beylage, iv. p. 302. Gibbon’s
      account is at least as probable as that of his critic.—M.]


      The importance of the occasion called for the presence and
      abilities of Galerius. At the head of a powerful army, collected
      from Illyricum and the East, he entered Italy, resolved to
      revenge the death of Severus, and to chastise the rebellious
      Romans; or, as he expressed his intentions, in the furious
      language of a barbarian, to extirpate the senate, and to destroy
      the people by the sword. But the skill of Maximian had concerted
      a prudent system of defence. The invader found every place
      hostile, fortified, and inaccessible; and though he forced his
      way as far as Narni, within sixty miles of Rome, his dominion in
      Italy was confined to the narrow limits of his camp. Sensible of
      the increasing difficulties of his enterprise, the haughty
      Galerius made the first advances towards a reconciliation, and
      despatched two of his most considerable officers to tempt the
      Roman princes by the offer of a conference, and the declaration
      of his paternal regard for Maxentius, who might obtain much more
      from his liberality than he could hope from the doubtful chance
      of war. 25 The offers of Galerius were rejected with firmness,
      his perfidious friendship refused with contempt, and it was not
      long before he discovered, that, unless he provided for his
      safety by a timely retreat, he had some reason to apprehend the
      fate of Severus. The wealth which the Romans defended against his
      rapacious tyranny, they freely contributed for his destruction.
      The name of Maximian, the popular arts of his son, the secret
      distribution of large sums, and the promise of still more liberal
      rewards, checked the ardor and corrupted the fidelity of the
      Illyrian legions; and when Galerius at length gave the signal of
      the retreat, it was with some difficulty that he could prevail on
      his veterans not to desert a banner which had so often conducted
      them to victory and honor. A contemporary writer assigns two
      other causes for the failure of the expedition; but they are both
      of such a nature, that a cautious historian will scarcely venture
      to adopt them. We are told that Galerius, who had formed a very
      imperfect notion of the greatness of Rome by the cities of the
      East with which he was acquainted, found his forces inadequate to
      the siege of that immense capital.


      But the extent of a city serves only to render it more accessible
      to the enemy: Rome had long since been accustomed to submit on
      the approach of a conqueror; nor could the temporary enthusiasm
      of the people have long contended against the discipline and
      valor of the legions. We are likewise informed that the legions
      themselves were struck with horror and remorse, and that those
      pious sons of the republic refused to violate the sanctity of
      their venerable parent. 26 But when we recollect with how much
      ease, in the more ancient civil wars, the zeal of party and the
      habits of military obedience had converted the native citizens of
      Rome into her most implacable enemies, we shall be inclined to
      distrust this extreme delicacy of strangers and barbarians, who
      had never beheld Italy till they entered it in a hostile manner.
      Had they not been restrained by motives of a more interested
      nature, they would probably have answered Galerius in the words
      of Cæsar’s veterans: “If our general wishes to lead us to the
      banks of the Tyber, we are prepared to trace out his camp.
      Whatsoever walls he has determined to level with the ground, our
      hands are ready to work the engines: nor shall we hesitate,
      should the name of the devoted city be Rome itself.” These are
      indeed the expressions of a poet; but of a poet who has been
      distinguished, and even censured, for his strict adherence to the
      truth of history. 27


      25 (return) [ With regard to this negotiation, see the fragments
      of an anonymous historian, published by Valesius at the end of
      his edition of Ammianus Marcellinus, p. 711. These fragments have
      furnished with several curious, and, as it should seem, authentic
      anecdotes.]


      26 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 28. The former of these
      reasons is probably taken from Virgil’s Shepherd: “Illam * * *
      ego huic notra similem, Meliboee, putavi,” &c. Lactantius
      delights in these poetical illusions.]


      27 (return)
      [ Castra super Tusci si ponere Tybridis undas; (_jubeas_)
      Hesperios audax veniam metator in agros.
      Tu quoscunque voles in planum effundere muros,
      His aries actus disperget saxa lacertis;
      Illa licet penitus tolli quam jusseris urbem
      Roma sit.
      Lucan. Pharsal. i. 381.]


      The legions of Galerius exhibited a very melancholy proof of
      their disposition, by the ravages which they committed in their
      retreat. They murdered, they ravished, they plundered, they drove
      away the flocks and herds of the Italians; they burnt the
      villages through which they passed, and they endeavored to
      destroy the country which it had not been in their power to
      subdue. During the whole march, Maxentius hung on their rear, but
      he very prudently declined a general engagement with those brave
      and desperate veterans. His father had undertaken a second
      journey into Gaul, with the hope of persuading Constantine, who
      had assembled an army on the frontier, to join in the pursuit,
      and to complete the victory. But the actions of Constantine were
      guided by reason, and not by resentment. He persisted in the wise
      resolution of maintaining a balance of power in the divided
      empire, and he no longer hated Galerius, when that aspiring
      prince had ceased to be an object of terror. 28


      28 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 27. Zosim. l. ii. p. 82. The
      latter, that Constantine, in his interview with Maximian, had
      promised to declare war against Galerius.]


      The mind of Galerius was the most susceptible of the sterner
      passions, but it was not, however, incapable of a sincere and
      lasting friendship. Licinius, whose manners as well as character
      were not unlike his own, seems to have engaged both his affection
      and esteem. Their intimacy had commenced in the happier period
      perhaps of their youth and obscurity. It had been cemented by the
      freedom and dangers of a military life; they had advanced almost
      by equal steps through the successive honors of the service; and
      as soon as Galerius was invested with the Imperial dignity, he
      seems to have conceived the design of raising his companion to
      the same rank with himself. During the short period of his
      prosperity, he considered the rank of Cæsar as unworthy of the
      age and merit of Licinius, and rather chose to reserve for him
      the place of Constantius, and the empire of the West. While the
      emperor was employed in the Italian war, he intrusted his friend
      with the defence of the Danube; and immediately after his return
      from that unfortunate expedition, he invested Licinius with the
      vacant purple of Severus, resigning to his immediate command the
      provinces of Illyricum. 29 The news of his promotion was no
      sooner carried into the East, than Maximin, who governed, or
      rather oppressed, the countries of Egypt and Syria, betrayed his
      envy and discontent, disdained the inferior name of Cæsar, and,
      notwithstanding the prayers as well as arguments of Galerius,
      exacted, almost by violence, the equal title of Augustus. 30 For
      the first, and indeed for the last time, the Roman world was
      administered by six emperors. In the West, Constantine and
      Maxentius affected to reverence their father Maximian. In the
      East, Licinius and Maximin honored with more real consideration
      their benefactor Galerius. The opposition of interest, and the
      memory of a recent war, divided the empire into two great hostile
      powers; but their mutual fears produced an apparent tranquillity,
      and even a feigned reconciliation, till the death of the elder
      princes, of Maximian, and more particularly of Galerius, gave a
      new direction to the views and passions of their surviving
      associates.


      29 (return) [ M. de Tillemont (Hist. des Empereurs, tom. iv. part
      i. p. 559) has proved that Licinius, without passing through the
      intermediate rank of Cæsar, was declared Augustus, the 11th of
      November, A. D. 307, after the return of Galerius from Italy.]


      30 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 32. When Galerius declared
      Licinius Augustus with himself, he tried to satisfy his younger
      associates, by inventing for Constantine and Maximin (not
      Maxentius; see Baluze, p. 81) the new title of sons of the
      Augusti. But when Maximin acquainted him that he had been saluted
      Augustus by the army, Galerius was obliged to acknowledge him as
      well as Constantine, as equal associates in the Imperial
      dignity.]


      When Maximian had reluctantly abdicated the empire, the venal
      orators of the times applauded his philosophic moderation. When
      his ambition excited, or at least encouraged, a civil war, they
      returned thanks to his generous patriotism, and gently censured
      that love of ease and retirement which had withdrawn him from the
      public service. 31 But it was impossible that minds like those of
      Maximian and his son could long possess in harmony an undivided
      power. Maxentius considered himself as the legal sovereign of
      Italy, elected by the Roman senate and people; nor would he
      endure the control of his father, who arrogantly declared that by
      _his_ name and abilities the rash youth had been established on
      the throne. The cause was solemnly pleaded before the Prætorian
      guards; and those troops, who dreaded the severity of the old
      emperor, espoused the party of Maxentius. 32 The life and freedom
      of Maximian were, however, respected, and he retired from Italy
      into Illyricum, affecting to lament his past conduct, and
      secretly contriving new mischiefs. But Galerius, who was well
      acquainted with his character, soon obliged him to leave his
      dominions, and the last refuge of the disappointed Maximian was
      the court of his son-in-law Constantine. 33 He was received with
      respect by that artful prince, and with the appearance of filial
      tenderness by the empress Fausta. That he might remove every
      suspicion, he resigned the Imperial purple a second time, 34
      professing himself at length convinced of the vanity of greatness
      and ambition. Had he persevered in this resolution, he might have
      ended his life with less dignity, indeed, than in his first
      retirement, yet, however, with comfort and reputation. But the
      near prospect of a throne brought back to his remembrance the
      state from whence he was fallen, and he resolved, by a desperate
      effort, either to reign or to perish. An incursion of the Franks
      had summoned Constantine, with a part of his army, to the banks
      of the Rhine; the remainder of the troops were stationed in the
      southern provinces of Gaul, which lay exposed to the enterprises
      of the Italian emperor, and a considerable treasure was deposited
      in the city of Arles. Maximian either craftily invented, or
      easily credited, a vain report of the death of Constantine.
      Without hesitation he ascended the throne, seized the treasure,
      and scattering it with his accustomed profusion among the
      soldiers, endeavored to awake in their minds the memory of his
      ancient dignity and exploits. Before he could establish his
      authority, or finish the negotiation which he appears to have
      entered into with his son Maxentius, the celerity of Constantine
      defeated all his hopes. On the first news of his perfidy and
      ingratitude, that prince returned by rapid marches from the Rhine
      to the Saone, embarked on the last-mentioned river at Chalons,
      and, at Lyons trusting himself to the rapidity of the Rhone,
      arrived at the gates of Arles with a military force which it was
      impossible for Maximian to resist, and which scarcely permitted
      him to take refuge in the neighboring city of Marseilles. The
      narrow neck of land which joined that place to the continent was
      fortified against the besiegers, whilst the sea was open, either
      for the escape of Maximian, or for the succor of Maxentius, if
      the latter should choose to disguise his invasion of Gaul under
      the honorable pretence of defending a distressed, or, as he might
      allege, an injured father. Apprehensive of the fatal consequences
      of delay, Constantine gave orders for an immediate assault; but
      the scaling-ladders were found too short for the height of the
      walls, and Marseilles might have sustained as long a siege as it
      formerly did against the arms of Cæsar, if the garrison,
      conscious either of their fault or of their danger, had not
      purchased their pardon by delivering up the city and the person
      of Maximian. A secret but irrevocable sentence of death was
      pronounced against the usurper; he obtained only the same favor
      which he had indulged to Severus, and it was published to the
      world, that, oppressed by the remorse of his repeated crimes, he
      strangled himself with his own hands. After he had lost the
      assistance, and disdained the moderate counsels, of Diocletian,
      the second period of his active life was a series of public
      calamities and personal mortifications, which were terminated, in
      about three years, by an ignominious death. He deserved his fate;
      but we should find more reason to applaud the humanity of
      Constantine, if he had spared an old man, the benefactor of his
      father, and the father of his wife. During the whole of this
      melancholy transaction, it appears that Fausta sacrificed the
      sentiments of nature to her conjugal duties. 35


      31 (return) [ See Panegyr. Vet. vi. 9. Audi doloris nostri
      liberam vocem, &c. The whole passage is imagined with artful
      flattery, and expressed with an easy flow of eloquence.]


      32 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 28. Zosim. l. ii. p. 82. A
      report was spread, that Maxentius was the son of some obscure
      Syrian, and had been substituted by the wife of Maximian as her
      own child. See Aurelius Victor, Anonym. Valesian, and Panegyr.
      Vet. ix. 3, 4.]


      33 (return) [ Ab urbe pulsum, ab Italia fugatum, ab Illyrico
      repudiatum, provinciis, tuis copiis, tuo palatio recepisti.
      Eumen. in Panegyr Vet. vii. 14.]


      34 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 29. Yet, after the
      resignation of the purple, Constantine still continued to
      Maximian the pomp and honors of the Imperial dignity; and on all
      public occasions gave the right hand place to his father-in-law.
      Panegyr. Vet. viii. 15.]


      35 (return) [ Zosim. l. ii. p. 82. Eumenius in Panegyr. Vet. vii.
      16—21. The latter of these has undoubtedly represented the whole
      affair in the most favorable light for his sovereign. Yet even
      from this partial narrative we may conclude, that the repeated
      clemency of Constantine, and the reiterated treasons of Maximian,
      as they are described by Lactantius, (de M. P. c. 29, 30,) and
      copied by the moderns, are destitute of any historical
      foundation. Note: Yet some pagan authors relate and confirm them.
      Aurelius Victor speaking of Maximin, says, cumque specie officii,
      dolis compositis, Constantinum generum tentaret acerbe, jure
      tamen interierat. Aur. Vict. de Cæsar l. p. 623. Eutropius also
      says, inde ad Gallias profectus est (Maximianus) composito
      tamquam a filio esset expulsus, ut Constantino genero jun
      geretur: moliens tamen Constantinum, reperta occasione,
      interficere, dedit justissimo exitu. Eutrop. x. p. 661. (Anon.
      Gent.)—G. —— These writers hardly confirm more than Gibbon
      admits; he denies the repeated clemency of Constantine, and the
      reiterated treasons of Maximian Compare Manso, p. 302.—M.]


      The last years of Galerius were less shameful and unfortunate;
      and though he had filled with more glory the subordinate station
      of Cæsar than the superior rank of Augustus, he preserved, till
      the moment of his death, the first place among the princes of the
      Roman world. He survived his retreat from Italy about four years;
      and wisely relinquishing his views of universal empire, he
      devoted the remainder of his life to the enjoyment of pleasure,
      and to the execution of some works of public utility, among which
      we may distinguish the discharging into the Danube the
      superfluous waters of the Lake Pelso, and the cutting down the
      immense forests that encompassed it; an operation worthy of a
      monarch, since it gave an extensive country to the agriculture of
      his Pannonian subjects. 36 His death was occasioned by a very
      painful and lingering disorder. His body, swelled by an
      intemperate course of life to an unwieldy corpulence, was covered
      with ulcers, and devoured by innumerable swarms of those insects
      which have given their name to a most loathsome disease; 37 but
      as Galerius had offended a very zealous and powerful party among
      his subjects, his sufferings, instead of exciting their
      compassion, have been celebrated as the visible effects of divine
      justice. 38 He had no sooner expired in his palace of Nicomedia,
      than the two emperors who were indebted for their purple to his
      favors, began to collect their forces, with the intention either
      of disputing, or of dividing, the dominions which he had left
      without a master. They were persuaded, however, to desist from
      the former design, and to agree in the latter. The provinces of
      Asia fell to the share of Maximin, and those of Europe augmented
      the portion of Licinius. The Hellespont and the Thracian
      Bosphorus formed their mutual boundary, and the banks of those
      narrow seas, which flowed in the midst of the Roman world, were
      covered with soldiers, with arms, and with fortifications. The
      deaths of Maximian and of Galerius reduced the number of emperors
      to four. The sense of their true interest soon connected Licinius
      and Constantine; a secret alliance was concluded between Maximin
      and Maxentius, and their unhappy subjects expected with terror
      the bloody consequences of their inevitable dissensions, which
      were no longer restrained by the fear or the respect which they
      had entertained for Galerius. 39


      36 (return) [ Aurelius Victor, c. 40. But that lake was situated
      on the upper Pannonia, near the borders of Noricum; and the
      province of Valeria (a name which the wife of Galerius gave to
      the drained country) undoubtedly lay between the Drave and the
      Danube, (Sextus Rufus, c. 9.) I should therefore suspect that
      Victor has confounded the Lake Pelso with the Volocean marshes,
      or, as they are now called, the Lake Sabaton. It is placed in the
      heart of Valeria, and its present extent is not less than twelve
      Hungarian miles (about seventy English) in length, and two in
      breadth. See Severini Pannonia, l. i. c. 9.]


      37 (return) [ Lactantius (de M. P. c. 33) and Eusebius (l. viii.
      c. 16) describe the symptoms and progress of his disorder with
      singular accuracy and apparent pleasure.]


      38 (return) [ If any (like the late Dr. Jortin, Remarks on
      Ecclesiastical History, vol. ii. p. 307—356) still delight in
      recording the wonderful deaths of the persecutors, I would
      recommend to their perusal an admirable passage of Grotius (Hist.
      l. vii. p. 332) concerning the last illness of Philip II. of
      Spain.]


      39 (return) [ See Eusebius, l. ix. 6, 10. Lactantius de M. P. c.
      36. Zosimus is less exact, and evidently confounds Maximian with
      Maximin.]


      Among so many crimes and misfortunes, occasioned by the passions
      of the Roman princes, there is some pleasure in discovering a
      single action which may be ascribed to their virtue. In the sixth
      year of his reign, Constantine visited the city of Autun, and
      generously remitted the arrears of tribute, reducing at the same
      time the proportion of their assessment from twenty-five to
      eighteen thousand heads, subject to the real and personal
      capitation. 40 Yet even this indulgence affords the most
      unquestionable proof of the public misery. This tax was so
      extremely oppressive, either in itself or in the mode of
      collecting it, that whilst the revenue was increased by
      extortion, it was diminished by despair: a considerable part of
      the territory of Autun was left uncultivated; and great numbers
      of the provincials rather chose to live as exiles and outlaws,
      than to support the weight of civil society. It is but too
      probable, that the bountiful emperor relieved, by a partial act
      of liberality, one among the many evils which he had caused by
      his general maxims of administration. But even those maxims were
      less the effect of choice than of necessity. And if we except the
      death of Maximian, the reign of Constantine in Gaul seems to have
      been the most innocent and even virtuous period of his life.


      The provinces were protected by his presence from the inroads of
      the barbarians, who either dreaded or experienced his active
      valor. After a signal victory over the Franks and Alemanni,
      several of their princes were exposed by his order to the wild
      beasts in the amphitheatre of Treves, and the people seem to have
      enjoyed the spectacle, without discovering, in such a treatment
      of royal captives, any thing that was repugnant to the laws of
      nations or of humanity. 41


      40 (return) [ See the viiith Panegyr., in which Eumenius
      displays, in the presence of Constantine, the misery and the
      gratitude of the city of Autun.]


      41 (return) [Eutropius, x. 3. Panegyr. Veter. vii. 10, 11, 12. A
      great number of the French youth were likewise exposed to the
      same cruel and ignominious death Yet the panegyric assumes
      something of an apologetic tone. Te vero Constantine,
      quantumlibet oderint hoses, dum perhorrescant. Hæc est enim vera
      virtus, ut non ament et quiescant. The orator appeals to the
      ancient ideal of the republic.—M.]


      The virtues of Constantine were rendered more illustrious by the
      vices of Maxentius. Whilst the Gallic provinces enjoyed as much
      happiness as the condition of the times was capable of receiving,
      Italy and Africa groaned under the dominion of a tyrant, as
      contemptible as he was odious. The zeal of flattery and faction
      has indeed too frequently sacrificed the reputation of the
      vanquished to the glory of their successful rivals; but even
      those writers who have revealed, with the most freedom and
      pleasure, the faults of Constantine, unanimously confess that
      Maxentius was cruel, rapacious, and profligate. 42 He had the
      good fortune to suppress a slight rebellion in Africa. The
      governor and a few adherents had been guilty; the province
      suffered for their crime. The flourishing cities of Cirtha and
      Carthage, and the whole extent of that fertile country, were
      wasted by fire and sword. The abuse of victory was followed by
      the abuse of law and justice. A formidable army of sycophants and
      delators invaded Africa; the rich and the noble were easily
      convicted of a connection with the rebels; and those among them
      who experienced the emperor’s clemency, were only punished by the
      confiscation of their estates. 43 So signal a victory was
      celebrated by a magnificent triumph, and Maxentius exposed to the
      eyes of the people the spoils and captives of a Roman province.
      The state of the capital was no less deserving of compassion than
      that of Africa. The wealth of Rome supplied an inexhaustible fund
      for his vain and prodigal expenses, and the ministers of his
      revenue were skilled in the arts of rapine. It was under his
      reign that the method of exacting a _free gift_ from the senators
      was first invented; and as the sum was insensibly increased, the
      pretences of levying it, a victory, a birth, a marriage, or an
      imperial consulship, were proportionably multiplied. 44 Maxentius
      had imbibed the same implacable aversion to the senate, which had
      characterized most of the former tyrants of Rome; nor was it
      possible for his ungrateful temper to forgive the generous
      fidelity which had raised him to the throne, and supported him
      against all his enemies. The lives of the senators were exposed
      to his jealous suspicions, the dishonor of their wives and
      daughters heightened the gratification of his sensual passions.
      45 It may be presumed that an Imperial lover was seldom reduced
      to sigh in vain; but whenever persuasion proved ineffectual, he
      had recourse to violence; and there remains _one_ memorable
      example of a noble matron, who preserved her chastity by a
      voluntary death. The soldiers were the only order of men whom he
      appeared to respect, or studied to please. He filled Rome and
      Italy with armed troops, connived at their tumults, suffered them
      with impunity to plunder, and even to massacre, the defenceless
      people; 46 and indulging them in the same licentiousness which
      their emperor enjoyed, Maxentius often bestowed on his military
      favorites the splendid villa, or the beautiful wife, of a
      senator. A prince of such a character, alike incapable of
      governing, either in peace or in war, might purchase the support,
      but he could never obtain the esteem, of the army. Yet his pride
      was equal to his other vices. Whilst he passed his indolent life
      either within the walls of his palace, or in the neighboring
      gardens of Sallust, he was repeatedly heard to declare, that _he
      alone_ was emperor, and that the other princes were no more than
      his lieutenants, on whom he had devolved the defence of the
      frontier provinces, that he might enjoy without interruption the
      elegant luxury of the capital. Rome, which had so long regretted
      the absence, lamented, during the six years of his reign, the
      presence of her sovereign. 47


      42 (return) [ Julian excludes Maxentius from the banquet of the
      Cæsars with abhorrence and contempt; and Zosimus (l. ii. p. 85)
      accuses him of every kind of cruelty and profligacy.]


      43 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 83—85. Aurelius Victor.]


      44 (return) [ The passage of Aurelius Victor should be read in
      the following manner: Primus instituto pessimo, munerum specie,
      Patres Oratores que pecuniam conferre prodigenti sibi cogeret.]


      45 (return) [ Panegyr. Vet. ix. 3. Euseb. Hist Eccles. viii. 14,
      et in Vit. Constant i. 33, 34. Rufinus, c. 17. The virtuous
      matron who stabbed herself to escape the violence of Maxentius,
      was a Christian, wife to the præfect of the city, and her name
      was Sophronia. It still remains a question among the casuists,
      whether, on such occasions, suicide is justifiable.]


      46 (return) [ Prætorianis cædem vulgi quondam annueret, is the
      vague expression of Aurelius Victor. See more particular, though
      somewhat different, accounts of a tumult and massacre which
      happened at Rome, in Eusebius, (l. viii. c. 14,) and in Zosimus,
      (l. ii. p. 84.)]


      47 (return) [ See, in the Panegyrics, (ix. 14,) a lively
      description of the indolence and vain pride of Maxentius. In
      another place the orator observes that the riches which Rome had
      accumulated in a period of 1060 years, were lavished by the
      tyrant on his mercenary bands; redemptis ad civile latrocinium
      manibus in gesserat.]


      Though Constantine might view the conduct of Maxentius with
      abhorrence, and the situation of the Romans with compassion, we
      have no reason to presume that he would have taken up arms to
      punish the one or to relieve the other. But the tyrant of Italy
      rashly ventured to provoke a formidable enemy, whose ambition had
      been hitherto restrained by considerations of prudence, rather
      than by principles of justice. 48 After the death of Maximian,
      his titles, according to the established custom, had been erased,
      and his statues thrown down with ignominy. His son, who had
      persecuted and deserted him when alive, effected to display the
      most pious regard for his memory, and gave orders that a similar
      treatment should be immediately inflicted on all the statues that
      had been erected in Italy and Africa to the honor of Constantine.


      That wise prince, who sincerely wished to decline a war, with the
      difficulty and importance of which he was sufficiently
      acquainted, at first dissembled the insult, and sought for
      redress by the milder expedient of negotiation, till he was
      convinced that the hostile and ambitious designs of the Italian
      emperor made it necessary for him to arm in his own defence.
      Maxentius, who openly avowed his pretensions to the whole
      monarchy of the West, had already prepared a very considerable
      force to invade the Gallic provinces on the side of Rhætia; and
      though he could not expect any assistance from Licinius, he was
      flattered with the hope that the legions of Illyricum, allured by
      his presents and promises, would desert the standard of that
      prince, and unanimously declare themselves his soldiers and
      subjects. 49 Constantine no longer hesitated. He had deliberated
      with caution, he acted with vigor. He gave a private audience to
      the ambassadors, who, in the name of the senate and people,
      conjured him to deliver Rome from a detested tyrant; and without
      regarding the timid remonstrances of his council, he resolved to
      prevent the enemy, and to carry the war into the heart of Italy.
      50


      48 (return) [ After the victory of Constantine, it was
      universally allowed, that the motive of delivering the republic
      from a detested tyrant, would, at any time, have justified his
      expedition into Italy. Euseb in Vi’. Constantin. l. i. c. 26.
      Panegyr. Vet. ix. 2.]


      49 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 84, 85. Nazarius in Panegyr. x.
      7—13.]


      50 (return) [ See Panegyr. Vet. ix. 2. Omnibus fere tuis
      Comitibus et Ducibus non solum tacite mussantibus, sed etiam
      aperte timentibus; contra consilia hominum, contra Haruspicum
      monita, ipse per temet liberandæ arbis tempus venisse sentires.
      The embassy of the Romans is mentioned only by Zonaras, (l.
      xiii.,) and by Cedrenus, (in Compend. Hist. p. 370;) but those
      modern Greeks had the opportunity of consulting many writers
      which have since been lost, among which we may reckon the life of
      Constantine by Praxagoras. Photius (p. 63) has made a short
      extract from that historical work.]


      The enterprise was as full of danger as of glory; and the
      unsuccessful event of two former invasions was sufficient to
      inspire the most serious apprehensions. The veteran troops, who
      revered the name of Maximian, had embraced in both those wars the
      party of his son, and were now restrained by a sense of honor, as
      well as of interest, from entertaining an idea of a second
      desertion. Maxentius, who considered the Prætorian guards as the
      firmest defence of his throne, had increased them to their
      ancient establishment; and they composed, including the rest of
      the Italians who were enlisted into his service, a formidable
      body of fourscore thousand men. Forty thousand Moors and
      Carthaginians had been raised since the reduction of Africa. Even
      Sicily furnished its proportion of troops; and the armies of
      Maxentius amounted to one hundred and seventy thousand foot and
      eighteen thousand horse. The wealth of Italy supplied the
      expenses of the war; and the adjacent provinces were exhausted,
      to form immense magazines of corn and every other kind of
      provisions.


      The whole force of Constantine consisted of ninety thousand foot
      and eight thousand horse; 51 and as the defence of the Rhine
      required an extraordinary attention during the absence of the
      emperor, it was not in his power to employ above half his troops
      in the Italian expedition, unless he sacrificed the public safety
      to his private quarrel. 52 At the head of about forty thousand
      soldiers he marched to encounter an enemy whose numbers were at
      least four times superior to his own. But the armies of Rome,
      placed at a secure distance from danger, were enervated by
      indulgence and luxury. Habituated to the baths and theatres of
      Rome, they took the field with reluctance, and were chiefly
      composed of veterans who had almost forgotten, or of new levies
      who had never acquired, the use of arms and the practice of war.
      The hardy legions of Gaul had long defended the frontiers of the
      empire against the barbarians of the North; and in the
      performance of that laborious service, their valor was exercised
      and their discipline confirmed. There appeared the same
      difference between the leaders as between the armies. Caprice or
      flattery had tempted Maxentius with the hopes of conquest; but
      these aspiring hopes soon gave way to the habits of pleasure and
      the consciousness of his inexperience. The intrepid mind of
      Constantine had been trained from his earliest youth to war, to
      action, and to military command.


      51 (return) [ Zosimus (l. ii. p. 86) has given us this curious
      account of the forces on both sides. He makes no mention of any
      naval armaments, though we are assured (Panegyr. Vet. ix. 25)
      that the war was carried on by sea as well as by land; and that
      the fleet of Constantine took possession of Sardinia, Corsica,
      and the ports of Italy.]


      52 (return) [ Panegyr. Vet. ix. 3. It is not surprising that the
      orator should diminish the numbers with which his sovereign
      achieved the conquest of Italy; but it appears somewhat singular
      that he should esteem the tyrant’s army at no more than 100,000
      men.]


      Chapter XIV: Six Emperors At The Same Time, Reunion Of The
      Empire.—Part III.


      When Hannibal marched from Gaul into Italy, he was obliged, first
      to discover, and then to open, a way over mountains, and through
      savage nations, that had never yielded a passage to a regular
      army. 53 The Alps were then guarded by nature, they are now
      fortified by art. Citadels, constructed with no less skill than
      labor and expense, command every avenue into the plain, and on
      that side render Italy almost inaccessible to the enemies of the
      king of Sardinia. 54 But in the course of the intermediate
      period, the generals, who have attempted the passage, have seldom
      experienced any difficulty or resistance. In the age of
      Constantine, the peasants of the mountains were civilized and
      obedient subjects; the country was plentifully stocked with
      provisions, and the stupendous highways, which the Romans had
      carried over the Alps, opened several communications between Gaul
      and Italy. 55 Constantine preferred the road of the Cottian Alps,
      or, as it is now called, of Mount Cenis, and led his troops with
      such active diligence, that he descended into the plain of
      Piedmont before the court of Maxentius had received any certain
      intelligence of his departure from the banks of the Rhine. The
      city of Susa, however, which is situated at the foot of Mount
      Cenis, was surrounded with walls, and provided with a garrison
      sufficiently numerous to check the progress of an invader; but
      the impatience of Constantine’s troops disdained the tedious
      forms of a siege. The same day that they appeared before Susa,
      they applied fire to the gates, and ladders to the walls; and
      mounting to the assault amidst a shower of stones and arrows,
      they entered the place sword in hand, and cut in pieces the
      greatest part of the garrison. The flames were extinguished by
      the care of Constantine, and the remains of Susa preserved from
      total destruction. About forty miles from thence, a more severe
      contest awaited him. A numerous army of Italians was assembled
      under the lieutenants of Maxentius, in the plains of Turin. Its
      principal strength consisted in a species of heavy cavalry, which
      the Romans, since the decline of their discipline, had borrowed
      from the nations of the East. The horses, as well as the men,
      were clothed in complete armor, the joints of which were artfully
      adapted to the motions of their bodies. The aspect of this
      cavalry was formidable, their weight almost irresistible; and as,
      on this occasion, their generals had drawn them up in a compact
      column or wedge, with a sharp point, and with spreading flanks,
      they flattered themselves that they could easily break and
      trample down the army of Constantine. They might, perhaps, have
      succeeded in their design, had not their experienced adversary
      embraced the same method of defence, which in similar
      circumstances had been practised by Aurelian. The skilful
      evolutions of Constantine divided and baffled this massy column
      of cavalry. The troops of Maxentius fled in confusion towards
      Turin; and as the gates of the city were shut against them, very
      few escaped the sword of the victorious pursuers. By this
      important service, Turin deserved to experience the clemency and
      even favor of the conqueror. He made his entry into the Imperial
      palace of Milan, and almost all the cities of Italy between the
      Alps and the Po not only acknowledged the power, but embraced
      with zeal the party, of Constantine. 56


      53 (return) [ The three principal passages of the Alps between
      Gaul and Italy, are those of Mount St. Bernard, Mount Cenis, and
      Mount Genevre. Tradition, and a resemblance of names, (Alpes
      Penninoe,) had assigned the first of these for the march of
      Hannibal, (see Simler de Alpibus.) The Chevalier de Folard
      (Polyp. tom. iv.) and M. d’Anville have led him over Mount
      Genevre. But notwithstanding the authority of an experienced
      officer and a learned geographer, the pretensions of Mount Cenis
      are supported in a specious, not to say a convincing, manner, by
      M. Grosley. Observations sur l’Italie, tom. i. p. 40, &c. ——The
      dissertation of Messrs. Cramer and Wickham has clearly shown that
      the Little St. Bernard must claim the honor of Hannibal’s
      passage. Mr. Long (London, 1831) has added some sensible
      corrections re Hannibal’s march to the Alps.—M]


      54 (return) [ La Brunette near Suse, Demont, Exiles,
      Fenestrelles, Coni, &c.]


      55 (return) [ See Ammian. Marcellin. xv. 10. His description of
      the roads over the Alps is clear, lively, and accurate.]


      56 (return) [ Zosimus as well as Eusebius hasten from the passage
      of the Alps to the decisive action near Rome. We must apply to
      the two Panegyrics for the intermediate actions of Constantine.]


      From Milan to Rome, the Æmilian and Flaminian highways offered an
      easy march of about four hundred miles; but though Constantine
      was impatient to encounter the tyrant, he prudently directed his
      operations against another army of Italians, who, by their
      strength and position, might either oppose his progress, or, in
      case of a misfortune, might intercept his retreat. Ruricius
      Pompeianus, a general distinguished by his valor and ability, had
      under his command the city of Verona, and all the troops that
      were stationed in the province of Venetia. As soon as he was
      informed that Constantine was advancing towards him, he detached
      a large body of cavalry, which was defeated in an engagement near
      Brescia, and pursued by the Gallic legions as far as the gates of
      Verona. The necessity, the importance, and the difficulties of
      the siege of Verona, immediately presented themselves to the
      sagacious mind of Constantine. 57 The city was accessible only by
      a narrow peninsula towards the west, as the other three sides
      were surrounded by the Adige, a rapid river, which covered the
      province of Venetia, from whence the besieged derived an
      inexhaustible supply of men and provisions. It was not without
      great difficulty, and after several fruitless attempts, that
      Constantine found means to pass the river at some distance above
      the city, and in a place where the torrent was less violent. He
      then encompassed Verona with strong lines, pushed his attacks
      with prudent vigor, and repelled a desperate sally of Pompeianus.
      That intrepid general, when he had used every means of defence
      that the strength of the place or that of the garrison could
      afford, secretly escaped from Verona, anxious not for his own,
      but for the public safety. With indefatigable diligence he soon
      collected an army sufficient either to meet Constantine in the
      field, or to attack him if he obstinately remained within his
      lines. The emperor, attentive to the motions, and informed of the
      approach of so formidable an enemy, left a part of his legions to
      continue the operations of the siege, whilst, at the head of
      those troops on whose valor and fidelity he more particularly
      depended, he advanced in person to engage the general of
      Maxentius. The army of Gaul was drawn up in two lines, according
      to the usual practice of war; but their experienced leader,
      perceiving that the numbers of the Italians far exceeded his own,
      suddenly changed his disposition, and, reducing the second,
      extended the front of his first line to a just proportion with
      that of the enemy. Such evolutions, which only veteran troops can
      execute without confusion in a moment of danger, commonly prove
      decisive; but as this engagement began towards the close of the
      day, and was contested with great obstinacy during the whole
      night, there was less room for the conduct of the generals than
      for the courage of the soldiers. The return of light displayed
      the victory of Constantine, and a field of carnage covered with
      many thousands of the vanquished Italians. Their general,
      Pompeianus, was found among the slain; Verona immediately
      surrendered at discretion, and the garrison was made prisoners of
      war. 58 When the officers of the victorious army congratulated
      their master on this important success, they ventured to add some
      respectful complaints, of such a nature, however, as the most
      jealous monarchs will listen to without displeasure. They
      represented to Constantine, that, not contented with all the
      duties of a commander, he had exposed his own person with an
      excess of valor which almost degenerated into rashness; and they
      conjured him for the future to pay more regard to the
      preservation of a life in which the safety of Rome and of the
      empire was involved. 59


      57 (return) [ The Marquis Maffei has examined the siege and
      battle of Verona with that degree of attention and accuracy which
      was due to a memorable action that happened in his native
      country. The fortifications of that city, constructed by
      Gallienus, were less extensive than the modern walls, and the
      amphitheatre was not included within their circumference. See
      Verona Illustrata, part i. p. 142 150.]


      58 (return) [ They wanted chains for so great a multitude of
      captives; and the whole council was at a loss; but the sagacious
      conqueror imagined the happy expedient of converting into fetters
      the swords of the vanquished. Panegyr. Vet. ix. 11.]


      59 (return) [ Panegyr. Vet. ix. 11.]


      While Constantine signalized his conduct and valor in the field,
      the sovereign of Italy appeared insensible of the calamities and
      danger of a civil war which reigned in the heart of his
      dominions. Pleasure was still the only business of Maxentius.
      Concealing, or at least attempting to conceal, from the public
      knowledge the misfortunes of his arms, 60 he indulged himself in
      a vain confidence which deferred the remedies of the approaching
      evil, without deferring the evil itself. 61 The rapid progress of
      Constantine 62 was scarcely sufficient to awaken him from his
      fatal security; he flattered himself, that his well-known
      liberality, and the majesty of the Roman name, which had already
      delivered him from two invasions, would dissipate with the same
      facility the rebellious army of Gaul. The officers of experience
      and ability, who had served under the banners of Maximian, were
      at length compelled to inform his effeminate son of the imminent
      danger to which he was reduced; and, with a freedom that at once
      surprised and convinced him, to urge the necessity of preventing
      his ruin by a vigorous exertion of his remaining power. The
      resources of Maxentius, both of men and money, were still
      considerable. The Prætorian guards felt how strongly their own
      interest and safety were connected with his cause; and a third
      army was soon collected, more numerous than those which had been
      lost in the battles of Turin and Verona. It was far from the
      intention of the emperor to lead his troops in person. A stranger
      to the exercises of war, he trembled at the apprehension of so
      dangerous a contest; and as fear is commonly superstitious, he
      listened with melancholy attention to the rumors of omens and
      presages which seemed to menace his life and empire. Shame at
      length supplied the place of courage, and forced him to take the
      field. He was unable to sustain the contempt of the Roman people.
      The circus resounded with their indignant clamors, and they
      tumultuously besieged the gates of the palace, reproaching the
      pusillanimity of their indolent sovereign, and celebrating the
      heroic spirit of Constantine. 63 Before Maxentius left Rome, he
      consulted the Sibylline books. The guardians of these ancient
      oracles were as well versed in the arts of this world as they
      were ignorant of the secrets of fate; and they returned him a
      very prudent answer, which might adapt itself to the event, and
      secure their reputation, whatever should be the chance of arms.
      64


      60 (return) [ Literas calamitatum suarum indices supprimebat.
      Panegyr Vet. ix. 15.]


      61 (return) [ Remedia malorum potius quam mala differebat, is the
      fine censure which Tacitus passes on the supine indolence of
      Vitellius.]


      62 (return) [ The Marquis Maffei has made it extremely probable
      that Constantine was still at Verona, the 1st of September, A.D.
      312, and that the memorable æra of the indications was dated from
      his conquest of the Cisalpine Gaul.]


      63 (return) [ See Panegyr. Vet. xi. 16. Lactantius de M. P. c.
      44.]


      64 (return) [ Illo die hostem Romanorum esse periturum. The
      vanquished became of course the enemy of Rome.]


      The celerity of Constantine’s march has been compared to the
      rapid conquest of Italy by the first of the Cæsars; nor is the
      flattering parallel repugnant to the truth of history, since no
      more than fifty-eight days elapsed between the surrender of
      Verona and the final decision of the war. Constantine had always
      apprehended that the tyrant would consult the dictates of fear,
      and perhaps of prudence; and that, instead of risking his last
      hopes in a general engagement, he would shut himself up within
      the walls of Rome. His ample magazines secured him against the
      danger of famine; and as the situation of Constantine admitted
      not of delay, he might have been reduced to the sad necessity of
      destroying with fire and sword the Imperial city, the noblest
      reward of his victory, and the deliverance of which had been the
      motive, or rather indeed the pretence, of the civil war. 65 It
      was with equal surprise and pleasure, that on his arrival at a
      place called Saxa Rubra, about nine miles from Rome, 66 he
      discovered the army of Maxentius prepared to give him battle. 67
      Their long front filled a very spacious plain, and their deep
      array reached to the banks of the Tyber, which covered their
      rear, and forbade their retreat. We are informed, and we may
      believe, that Constantine disposed his troops with consummate
      skill, and that he chose for himself the post of honor and
      danger. Distinguished by the splendor of his arms, he charged in
      person the cavalry of his rival; and his irresistible attack
      determined the fortune of the day. The cavalry of Maxentius was
      principally composed either of unwieldy cuirassiers, or of light
      Moors and Numidians. They yielded to the vigor of the Gallic
      horse, which possessed more activity than the one, more firmness
      than the other. The defeat of the two wings left the infantry
      without any protection on its flanks, and the undisciplined
      Italians fled without reluctance from the standard of a tyrant
      whom they had always hated, and whom they no longer feared. The
      Prætorians, conscious that their offences were beyond the reach
      of mercy, were animated by revenge and despair. Notwithstanding
      their repeated efforts, those brave veterans were unable to
      recover the victory: they obtained, however, an honorable death;
      and it was observed that their bodies covered the same ground
      which had been occupied by their ranks. 68 The confusion then
      became general, and the dismayed troops of Maxentius, pursued by
      an implacable enemy, rushed by thousands into the deep and rapid
      stream of the Tyber. The emperor himself attempted to escape back
      into the city over the Milvian bridge; but the crowds which
      pressed together through that narrow passage forced him into the
      river, where he was immediately drowned by the weight of his
      armor. 69 His body, which had sunk very deep into the mud, was
      found with some difficulty the next day. The sight of his head,
      when it was exposed to the eyes of the people, convinced them of
      their deliverance, and admonished them to receive with
      acclamations of loyalty and gratitude the fortunate Constantine,
      who thus achieved by his valor and ability the most splendid
      enterprise of his life. 70


      65 (return) [ See Panegyr. Vet. ix. 16, x. 27. The former of
      these orators magnifies the hoards of corn, which Maxentius had
      collected from Africa and the Islands. And yet, if there is any
      truth in the scarcity mentioned by Eusebius, (in Vit. Constantin.
      l. i. c. 36,) the Imperial granaries must have been open only to
      the soldiers.]


      66 (return) [ Maxentius... tandem urbe in Saxa Rubra, millia
      ferme novem ægerrime progressus. Aurelius Victor. See Cellarius
      Geograph. Antiq. tom. i. p. 463. Saxa Rubra was in the
      neighborhood of the Cremera, a trifling rivulet, illustrated by
      the valor and glorious death of the three hundred Fabii.]


      67 (return) [ The post which Maxentius had taken, with the Tyber
      in his rear is very clearly described by the two Panegyrists, ix.
      16, x. 28.]


      68 (return) [ Exceptis latrocinii illius primis auctoribus, qui
      desperata venia ocum quem pugnæ sumpserant texere corporibus.
      Panegyr. Vet 17.]


      69 (return) [ A very idle rumor soon prevailed, that Maxentius,
      who had not taken any precaution for his own retreat, had
      contrived a very artful snare to destroy the army of the
      pursuers; but that the wooden bridge, which was to have been
      loosened on the approach of Constantine, unluckily broke down
      under the weight of the flying Italians. M. de Tillemont (Hist.
      des Empereurs, tom. iv. part i. p. 576) very seriously examines
      whether, in contradiction to common sense, the testimony of
      Eusebius and Zosimus ought to prevail over the silence of
      Lactantius, Nazarius, and the anonymous, but contemporary orator,
      who composed the ninth Panegyric. * Note: Manso (Beylage, vi.)
      examines the question, and adduces two manifest allusions to the
      bridge, from the Life of Constantine by Praxagoras, and from
      Libanius. Is it not very probable that such a bridge was thrown
      over the river to facilitate the advance, and to secure the
      retreat, of the army of Maxentius? In case of defeat, orders were
      given for destroying it, in order to check the pursuit: it broke
      down accidentally, or in the confusion was destroyed, as has not
      unfrequently been the case, before the proper time.—M.]


      70 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 86-88, and the two Panegyrics,
      the former of which was pronounced a few months afterwards,
      afford the clearest notion of this great battle. Lactantius,
      Eusebius, and even the Epitomes, supply several useful hints.]


      In the use of victory, Constantine neither deserved the praise of
      clemency, nor incurred the censure of immoderate rigor. 71 He
      inflicted the same treatment to which a defeat would have exposed
      his own person and family, put to death the two sons of the
      tyrant, and carefully extirpated his whole race. The most
      distinguished adherents of Maxentius must have expected to share
      his fate, as they had shared his prosperity and his crimes; but
      when the Roman people loudly demanded a greater number of
      victims, the conqueror resisted, with firmness and humanity,
      those servile clamors, which were dictated by flattery as well as
      by resentment. Informers were punished and discouraged; the
      innocent, who had suffered under the late tyranny, were recalled
      from exile, and restored to their estates. A general act of
      oblivion quieted the minds and settled the property of the
      people, both in Italy and in Africa. 72 The first time that
      Constantine honored the senate with his presence, he
      recapitulated his own services and exploits in a modest oration,
      assured that illustrious order of his sincere regard, and
      promised to reëstablish its ancient dignity and privileges. The
      grateful senate repaid these unmeaning professions by the empty
      titles of honor, which it was yet in their power to bestow; and
      without presuming to ratify the authority of Constantine, they
      passed a decree to assign him the first rank among the three
      _Augusti_ who governed the Roman world. 73 Games and festivals
      were instituted to preserve the fame of his victory, and several
      edifices, raised at the expense of Maxentius, were dedicated to
      the honor of his successful rival. The triumphal arch of
      Constantine still remains a melancholy proof of the decline of
      the arts, and a singular testimony of the meanest vanity. As it
      was not possible to find in the capital of the empire a sculptor
      who was capable of adorning that public monument, the arch of
      Trajan, without any respect either for his memory or for the
      rules of propriety, was stripped of its most elegant figures. The
      difference of times and persons, of actions and characters, was
      totally disregarded. The Parthian captives appear prostrate at
      the feet of a prince who never carried his arms beyond the
      Euphrates; and curious antiquarians can still discover the head
      of Trajan on the trophies of Constantine. The new ornaments which
      it was necessary to introduce between the vacancies of ancient
      sculpture are executed in the rudest and most unskilful manner.
      74


      71 (return) [ Zosimus, the enemy of Constantine, allows (l. ii.
      p. 88) that only a few of the friends of Maxentius were put to
      death; but we may remark the expressive passage of Nazarius,
      (Panegyr. Vet. x. 6.) Omnibus qui labefactari statum ejus
      poterant cum stirpe deletis. The other orator (Panegyr. Vet. ix.
      20, 21) contents himself with observing, that Constantine, when
      he entered Rome, did not imitate the cruel massacres of Cinna, of
      Marius, or of Sylla. * Note: This may refer to the son or sons of
      Maxentius.—M.]


      72 (return) [ See the two Panegyrics, and the laws of this and
      the ensuing year, in the Theodosian Code.]


      73 (return) [ Panegyr. Vet. ix. 20. Lactantius de M. P. c. 44.
      Maximin, who was confessedly the eldest Cæsar, claimed, with some
      show of reason, the first rank among the Augusti.]


      74 (return) [ Adhuc cuncta opera quæ magnifice construxerat,
      urbis fanum atque basilicam, Flavii meritis patres sacravere.
      Aurelius Victor. With regard to the theft of Trajan’s trophies,
      consult Flaminius Vacca, apud Montfaucon, Diarium Italicum, p.
      250, and l’Antiquite Expliquee of the latter, tom. iv. p. 171.]


      The final abolition of the Prætorian guards was a measure of
      prudence as well as of revenge. Those haughty troops, whose
      numbers and privileges had been restored, and even augmented, by
      Maxentius, were forever suppressed by Constantine. Their
      fortified camp was destroyed, and the few Prætorians who had
      escaped the fury of the sword were dispersed among the legions,
      and banished to the frontiers of the empire, where they might be
      serviceable without again becoming dangerous. 75 By suppressing
      the troops which were usually stationed in Rome, Constantine gave
      the fatal blow to the dignity of the senate and people, and the
      disarmed capital was exposed without protection to the insults or
      neglect of its distant master. We may observe, that in this last
      effort to preserve their expiring freedom, the Romans, from the
      apprehension of a tribute, had raised Maxentius to the throne. He
      exacted that tribute from the senate under the name of a free
      gift. They implored the assistance of Constantine. He vanquished
      the tyrant, and converted the free gift into a perpetual tax. The
      senators, according to the declaration which was required of
      their property, were divided into several classes. The most
      opulent paid annually eight pounds of gold, the next class paid
      four, the last two, and those whose poverty might have claimed an
      exemption, were assessed, however, at seven pieces of gold.
      Besides the regular members of the senate, their sons, their
      descendants, and even their relations, enjoyed the vain
      privileges, and supported the heavy burdens, of the senatorial
      order; nor will it any longer excite our surprise, that
      Constantine should be attentive to increase the number of persons
      who were included under so useful a description. 76 After the
      defeat of Maxentius, the victorious emperor passed no more than
      two or three months in Rome, which he visited twice during the
      remainder of his life, to celebrate the solemn festivals of the
      tenth and of the twentieth years of his reign. Constantine was
      almost perpetually in motion, to exercise the legions, or to
      inspect the state of the provinces. Treves, Milan, Aquileia,
      Sirmium, Naissus, and Thessalonica, were the occasional places of
      his residence, till he founded a new Rome on the confines of
      Europe and Asia. 77


      75 (return) [ Prætoriæ legiones ac subsidia factionibus aptiora
      quam urbi Romæ, sublata penitus; simul arma atque usus indumenti
      militaris Aurelius Victor. Zosimus (l. ii. p. 89) mentions this
      fact as an historian, and it is very pompously celebrated in the
      ninth Panegyric.]


      76 (return) [ Ex omnibus provinciis optimates viros Curiæ tuæ
      pigneraveris ut Senatus dignitas.... ex totius Orbis flore
      consisteret. Nazarius in Panegyr. Vet x. 35. The word
      pigneraveris might almost seem maliciously chosen. Concerning the
      senatorial tax, see Zosimus, l. ii. p. 115, the second title of
      the sixth book of the Theodosian Code, with Godefroy’s
      Commentary, and Memoires de l’Academic des Inscriptions, tom.
      xxviii. p. 726.]


      77 (return) [ From the Theodosian Code, we may now begin to trace
      the motions of the emperors; but the dates both of time and place
      have frequently been altered by the carelessness of
      transcribers.]


      Before Constantine marched into Italy, he had secured the
      friendship, or at least the neutrality, of Licinius, the Illyrian
      emperor. He had promised his sister Constantia in marriage to
      that prince; but the celebration of the nuptials was deferred
      till after the conclusion of the war, and the interview of the
      two emperors at Milan, which was appointed for that purpose,
      appeared to cement the union of their families and interests. 78
      In the midst of the public festivity they were suddenly obliged
      to take leave of each other. An inroad of the Franks summoned
      Constantine to the Rhine, and the hostile approach of the
      sovereign of Asia demanded the immediate presence of Licinius.
      Maximin had been the secret ally of Maxentius, and without being
      discouraged by his fate, he resolved to try the fortune of a
      civil war. He moved out of Syria, towards the frontiers of
      Bithynia, in the depth of winter. The season was severe and
      tempestuous; great numbers of men as well as horses perished in
      the snow; and as the roads were broken up by incessant rains, he
      was obliged to leave behind him a considerable part of the heavy
      baggage, which was unable to follow the rapidity of his forced
      marches. By this extraordinary effort of diligence, he arrived
      with a harassed but formidable army, on the banks of the Thracian
      Bosphorus before the lieutenants of Licinius were apprised of his
      hostile intentions. Byzantium surrendered to the power of
      Maximin, after a siege of eleven days. He was detained some days
      under the walls of Heraclea; and he had no sooner taken
      possession of that city than he was alarmed by the intelligence
      that Licinius had pitched his camp at the distance of only
      eighteen miles. After a fruitless negotiation, in which the two
      princes attempted to seduce the fidelity of each other’s
      adherents, they had recourse to arms. The emperor of the East
      commanded a disciplined and veteran army of above seventy
      thousand men; and Licinius, who had collected about thirty
      thousand Illyrians, was at first oppressed by the superiority of
      numbers. His military skill, and the firmness of his troops,
      restored the day, and obtained a decisive victory. The incredible
      speed which Maximin exerted in his flight is much more celebrated
      than his prowess in the battle. Twenty-four hours afterwards he
      was seen, pale, trembling, and without his Imperial ornaments, at
      Nicomedia, one hundred and sixty miles from the place of his
      defeat. The wealth of Asia was yet unexhausted; and though the
      flower of his veterans had fallen in the late action, he had
      still power, if he could obtain time, to draw very numerous
      levies from Syria and Egypt. But he survived his misfortune only
      three or four months. His death, which happened at Tarsus, was
      variously ascribed to despair, to poison, and to the divine
      justice. As Maximin was alike destitute of abilities and of
      virtue, he was lamented neither by the people nor by the
      soldiers. The provinces of the East, delivered from the terrors
      of civil war, cheerfully acknowledged the authority of Licinius.
      79


      78 (return) [ Zosimus (l. ii. p. 89) observes, that before the
      war the sister of Constantine had been betrothed to Licinius.
      According to the younger Victor, Diocletian was invited to the
      nuptials; but having ventured to plead his age and infirmities,
      he received a second letter, filled with reproaches for his
      supposed partiality to the cause of Maxentius and Maximin.]


      79 (return) [ Zosimus mentions the defeat and death of Maximin as
      ordinary events; but Lactantius expatiates on them, (de M. P. c.
      45-50,) ascribing them to the miraculous interposition of Heaven.
      Licinius at that time was one of the protectors of the church.]


      The vanquished emperor left behind him two children, a boy of
      about eight, and a girl of about seven, years old. Their
      inoffensive age might have excited compassion; but the compassion
      of Licinius was a very feeble resource, nor did it restrain him
      from _extinguishing_ the name and memory of his adversary. The
      death of Severianus will admit of less excuse, as it was dictated
      neither by revenge nor by policy. The conqueror had never
      received any injury from the father of that unhappy youth, and
      the short and obscure reign of Severus, in a distant part of the
      empire, was already forgotten. But the execution of Candidianus
      was an act of the blackest cruelty and ingratitude. He was the
      natural son of Galerius, the friend and benefactor of Licinius.
      The prudent father had judged him too young to sustain the weight
      of a diadem; but he hoped that, under the protection of princes
      who were indebted to his favor for the Imperial purple,
      Candidianus might pass a secure and honorable life. He was now
      advancing towards the twentieth year of his age, and the royalty
      of his birth, though unsupported either by merit or ambition, was
      sufficient to exasperate the jealous mind of Licinius. 80 To
      these innocent and illustrious victims of his tyranny, we must
      add the wife and daughter of the emperor Diocletian. When that
      prince conferred on Galerius the title of Cæsar, he had given him
      in marriage his daughter Valeria, whose melancholy adventures
      might furnish a very singular subject for tragedy. She had
      fulfilled and even surpassed the duties of a wife. As she had not
      any children herself, she condescended to adopt the illegitimate
      son of her husband, and invariably displayed towards the unhappy
      Candidianus the tenderness and anxiety of a real mother. After
      the death of Galerius, her ample possessions provoked the
      avarice, and her personal attractions excited the desires, of his
      successor, Maximin. 81 He had a wife still alive; but divorce was
      permitted by the Roman law, and the fierce passions of the tyrant
      demanded an immediate gratification. The answer of Valeria was
      such as became the daughter and widow of emperors; but it was
      tempered by the prudence which her defenceless condition
      compelled her to observe. She represented to the persons whom
      Maximin had employed on this occasion, “that even if honor could
      permit a woman of her character and dignity to entertain a
      thought of second nuptials, decency at least must forbid her to
      listen to his addresses at a time when the ashes of her husband
      and his benefactor were still warm, and while the sorrows of her
      mind were still expressed by her mourning garments. She ventured
      to declare, that she could place very little confidence in the
      professions of a man whose cruel inconstancy was capable of
      repudiating a faithful and affectionate wife.” 82 On this
      repulse, the love of Maximin was converted into fury; and as
      witnesses and judges were always at his disposal, it was easy for
      him to cover his fury with an appearance of legal proceedings,
      and to assault the reputation as well as the happiness of
      Valeria. Her estates were confiscated, her eunuchs and domestics
      devoted to the most inhuman tortures; and several innocent and
      respectable matrons, who were honored with her friendship,
      suffered death, on a false accusation of adultery. The empress
      herself, together with her mother Prisca, was condemned to exile;
      and as they were ignominiously hurried from place to place before
      they were confined to a sequestered village in the deserts of
      Syria, they exposed their shame and distress to the provinces of
      the East, which, during thirty years, had respected their august
      dignity. Diocletian made several ineffectual efforts to alleviate
      the misfortunes of his daughter; and, as the last return that he
      expected for the Imperial purple, which he had conferred upon
      Maximin, he entreated that Valeria might be permitted to share
      his retirement of Salona, and to close the eyes of her afflicted
      father. 83 He entreated; but as he could no longer threaten, his
      prayers were received with coldness and disdain; and the pride of
      Maximin was gratified, in treating Diocletian as a suppliant, and
      his daughter as a criminal. The death of Maximin seemed to assure
      the empresses of a favorable alteration in their fortune. The
      public disorders relaxed the vigilance of their guard, and they
      easily found means to escape from the place of their exile, and
      to repair, though with some precaution, and in disguise, to the
      court of Licinius. His behavior, in the first days of his reign,
      and the honorable reception which he gave to young Candidianus,
      inspired Valeria with a secret satisfaction, both on her own
      account and on that of her adopted son. But these grateful
      prospects were soon succeeded by horror and astonishment; and the
      bloody executions which stained the palace of Nicomedia
      sufficiently convinced her that the throne of Maximin was filled
      by a tyrant more inhuman than himself. Valeria consulted her
      safety by a hasty flight, and, still accompanied by her mother
      Prisca, they wandered above fifteen months 84 through the
      provinces, concealed in the disguise of plebeian habits. They
      were at length discovered at Thessalonica; and as the sentence of
      their death was already pronounced, they were immediately
      beheaded, and their bodies thrown into the sea. The people gazed
      on the melancholy spectacle; but their grief and indignation were
      suppressed by the terrors of a military guard. Such was the
      unworthy fate of the wife and daughter of Diocletian. We lament
      their misfortunes, we cannot discover their crimes; and whatever
      idea we may justly entertain of the cruelty of Licinius, it
      remains a matter of surprise that he was not contented with some
      more secret and decent method of revenge. 85


      80 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 50. Aurelius Victor touches
      on the different conduct of Licinius, and of Constantine, in the
      use of victory.]


      81 (return) [ The sensual appetites of Maximin were gratified at
      the expense of his subjects. His eunuchs, who forced away wives
      and virgins, examined their naked charms with anxious curiosity,
      lest any part of their body should be found unworthy of the royal
      embraces. Coyness and disdain were considered as treason, and the
      obstinate fair one was condemned to be drowned. A custom was
      gradually introduced, that no person should marry a wife without
      the permission of the emperor, “ut ipse in omnibus nuptiis
      prægustator esset.” Lactantius de M. P. c. 38.]


      82 (return) [ Lactantius de M. P. c. 39.]


      83 (return) [ Diocletian at last sent cognatum suum, quendam
      militarem æ potentem virum, to intercede in favor of his
      daughter, (Lactantius de M. P. c. 41.) We are not sufficiently
      acquainted with the history of these times to point out the
      person who was employed.]


      84 (return) [ Valeria quoque per varias provincias quindecim
      mensibus plebeio cultu pervagata. Lactantius de M. P. c. 51.
      There is some doubt whether we should compute the fifteen months
      from the moment of her exile, or from that of her escape. The
      expression of parvagata seems to denote the latter; but in that
      case we must suppose that the treatise of Lactantius was written
      after the first civil war between Licinius and Constantine. See
      Cuper, p. 254.]


      85 (return) [ Ita illis pudicitia et conditio exitio fuit.
      Lactantius de M. P. c. 51. He relates the misfortunes of the
      innocent wife and daughter of Discletian with a very natural
      mixture of pity and exultation.]


      The Roman world was now divided between Constantine and Licinius,
      the former of whom was master of the West, and the latter of the
      East. It might perhaps have been expected that the conquerors,
      fatigued with civil war, and connected by a private as well as
      public alliance, would have renounced, or at least would have
      suspended, any further designs of ambition. And yet a year had
      scarcely elapsed after the death of Maximin, before the
      victorious emperors turned their arms against each other. The
      genius, the success, and the aspiring temper of Constantine, may
      seem to mark him out as the aggressor; but the perfidious
      character of Licinius justifies the most unfavorable suspicions,
      and by the faint light which history reflects on this
      transaction, 86 we may discover a conspiracy fomented by his arts
      against the authority of his colleague. Constantine had lately
      given his sister Anastasia in marriage to Bassianus, a man of a
      considerable family and fortune, and had elevated his new kinsman
      to the rank of Cæsar. According to the system of government
      instituted by Diocletian, Italy, and perhaps Africa, were
      designed for his department in the empire. But the performance of
      the promised favor was either attended with so much delay, or
      accompanied with so many unequal conditions, that the fidelity of
      Bassianus was alienated rather than secured by the honorable
      distinction which he had obtained. His nomination had been
      ratified by the consent of Licinius; and that artful prince, by
      the means of his emissaries, soon contrived to enter into a
      secret and dangerous correspondence with the new Cæsar, to
      irritate his discontents, and to urge him to the rash enterprise
      of extorting by violence what he might in vain solicit from the
      justice of Constantine. But the vigilant emperor discovered the
      conspiracy before it was ripe for execution; and after solemnly
      renouncing the alliance of Bassianus, despoiled him of the
      purple, and inflicted the deserved punishment on his treason and
      ingratitude. The haughty refusal of Licinius, when he was
      required to deliver up the criminals who had taken refuge in his
      dominions, confirmed the suspicions already entertained of his
      perfidy; and the indignities offered at Æmona, on the frontiers
      of Italy, to the statues of Constantine, became the signal of
      discord between the two princes. 87


      86 (return) [ The curious reader, who consults the Valesian
      fragment, p. 713, will probably accuse me of giving a bold and
      licentious paraphrase; but if he considers it with attention, he
      will acknowledge that my interpretation is probable and
      consistent.]


      87 (return) [ The situation of Æmona, or, as it is now called,
      Laybach, in Carniola, (D’Anville, Geographie Ancienne, tom. i. p.
      187,) may suggest a conjecture. As it lay to the north-east of
      the Julian Alps, that important territory became a natural object
      of dispute between the sovereigns of Italy and of Illyricum.]


      The first battle was fought near Cibalis, a city of Pannonia,
      situated on the River Save, about fifty miles above Sirmium. 88
      From the inconsiderable forces which in this important contest
      two such powerful monarchs brought into the field, it may be
      inferred that the one was suddenly provoked, and that the other
      was unexpectedly surprised. The emperor of the West had only
      twenty thousand, and the sovereign of the East no more than five
      and thirty thousand, men. The inferiority of number was, however,
      compensated by the advantage of the ground. Constantine had taken
      post in a defile about half a mile in breadth, between a steep
      hill and a deep morass, and in that situation he steadily
      expected and repulsed the first attack of the enemy. He pursued
      his success, and advanced into the plain. But the veteran legions
      of Illyricum rallied under the standard of a leader who had been
      trained to arms in the school of Probus and Diocletian. The
      missile weapons on both sides were soon exhausted; the two
      armies, with equal valor, rushed to a closer engagement of swords
      and spears, and the doubtful contest had already lasted from the
      dawn of the day to a late hour of the evening, when the right
      wing, which Constantine led in person, made a vigorous and
      decisive charge. The judicious retreat of Licinius saved the
      remainder of his troops from a total defeat; but when he computed
      his loss, which amounted to more than twenty thousand men, he
      thought it unsafe to pass the night in the presence of an active
      and victorious enemy. Abandoning his camp and magazines, he
      marched away with secrecy and diligence at the head of the
      greatest part of his cavalry, and was soon removed beyond the
      danger of a pursuit. His diligence preserved his wife, his son,
      and his treasures, which he had deposited at Sirmium. Licinius
      passed through that city, and breaking down the bridge on the
      Save, hastened to collect a new army in Dacia and Thrace. In his
      flight he bestowed the precarious title of Cæsar on Valens, his
      general of the Illyrian frontier. 89


      88 (return) [ Cibalis or Cibalæ (whose name is still preserved in
      the obscure ruins of Swilei) was situated about fifty miles from
      Sirmium, the capital of Illyricum, and about one hundred from
      Taurunum, or Belgrade, and the conflux of the Danube and the
      Save. The Roman garrisons and cities on those rivers are finely
      illustrated by M. d’Anville in a memoir inserted in l’Academie
      des Inscriptions, tom. xxviii.]


      89 (return) [ Zosimus (l. ii. p. 90, 91) gives a very particular
      account of this battle; but the descriptions of Zosimus are
      rhetorical rather than military]


      Chapter XIV: Six Emperors At The Same Time, Reunion Of The
      Empire.—Part IV.


      The plain of Mardia in Thrace was the theatre of a second battle
      no less obstinate and bloody than the former. The troops on both
      sides displayed the same valor and discipline; and the victory
      was once more decided by the superior abilities of Constantine,
      who directed a body of five thousand men to gain an advantageous
      height, from whence, during the heat of the action, they attacked
      the rear of the enemy, and made a very considerable slaughter.
      The troops of Licinius, however, presenting a double front, still
      maintained their ground, till the approach of night put an end to
      the combat, and secured their retreat towards the mountains of
      Macedonia. 90 The loss of two battles, and of his bravest
      veterans, reduced the fierce spirit of Licinius to sue for peace.
      His ambassador Mistrianus was admitted to the audience of
      Constantine: he expatiated on the common topics of moderation and
      humanity, which are so familiar to the eloquence of the
      vanquished; represented in the most insinuating language, that
      the event of the war was still doubtful, whilst its inevitable
      calamities were alike pernicious to both the contending parties;
      and declared that he was authorized to propose a lasting and
      honorable peace in the name of the _two_ emperors his masters.
      Constantine received the mention of Valens with indignation and
      contempt. “It was not for such a purpose,” he sternly replied,
      “that we have advanced from the shores of the western ocean in an
      uninterrupted course of combats and victories, that, after
      rejecting an ungrateful kinsman, we should accept for our
      colleague a contemptible slave. The abdication of Valens is the
      first article of the treaty.” 91 It was necessary to accept this
      humiliating condition; and the unhappy Valens, after a reign of a
      few days, was deprived of the purple and of his life. As soon as
      this obstacle was removed, the tranquillity of the Roman world
      was easily restored. The successive defeats of Licinius had
      ruined his forces, but they had displayed his courage and
      abilities. His situation was almost desperate, but the efforts of
      despair are sometimes formidable, and the good sense of
      Constantine preferred a great and certain advantage to a third
      trial of the chance of arms. He consented to leave his rival, or,
      as he again styled Licinius, his friend and brother, in the
      possession of Thrace, Asia Minor, Syria, and Egypt; but the
      provinces of Pannonia, Dalmatia, Dacia, Macedonia, and Greece,
      were yielded to the Western empire, and the dominions of
      Constantine now extended from the confines of Caledonia to the
      extremity of Peloponnesus. It was stipulated by the same treaty,
      that three royal youths, the sons of emperors, should be called
      to the hopes of the succession. Crispus and the young Constantine
      were soon afterwards declared Cæsars in the West, while the
      younger Licinius was invested with the same dignity in the East.
      In this double proportion of honors, the conqueror asserted the
      superiority of his arms and power. 92


      90 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 92, 93. Anonym. Valesian. p.
      713. The Epitomes furnish some circumstances; but they frequently
      confound the two wars between Licinius and Constantine.]


      91 (return) [ Petrus Patricius in Excerpt. Legat. p. 27. If it
      should be thought that signifies more properly a son-in-law, we
      might conjecture that Constantine, assuming the name as well as
      the duties of a father, had adopted his younger brothers and
      sisters, the children of Theodora. But in the best authors
      sometimes signifies a husband, sometimes a father-in-law, and
      sometimes a kinsman in general. See Spanheim, Observat. ad
      Julian. Orat. i. p. 72.]


      92 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 93. Anonym. Valesian. p. 713.
      Eutropius, x. v. Aurelius Victor, Euseb. in Chron. Sozomen, l. i.
      c. 2. Four of these writers affirm that the promotion of the
      Cæsars was an article of the treaty. It is, however, certain,
      that the younger Constantine and Licinius were not yet born; and
      it is highly probable that the promotion was made the 1st of
      March, A. D. 317. The treaty had probably stipulated that the two
      Cæsars might be created by the western, and one only by the
      eastern emperor; but each of them reserved to himself the choice
      of the persons.]


      The reconciliation of Constantine and Licinius, though it was
      imbittered by resentment and jealousy, by the remembrance of
      recent injuries, and by the apprehension of future dangers,
      maintained, however, above eight years, the tranquility of the
      Roman world. As a very regular series of the Imperial laws
      commences about this period, it would not be difficult to
      transcribe the civil regulations which employed the leisure of
      Constantine. But the most important of his institutions are
      intimately connected with the new system of policy and religion,
      which was not perfectly established till the last and peaceful
      years of his reign. There are many of his laws, which, as far as
      they concern the rights and property of individuals, and the
      practice of the bar, are more properly referred to the private
      than to the public jurisprudence of the empire; and he published
      many edicts of so local and temporary a nature, that they would
      ill deserve the notice of a general history. Two laws, however,
      may be selected from the crowd; the one for its importance, the
      other for its singularity; the former for its remarkable
      benevolence, the latter for its excessive severity. 1. The horrid
      practice, so familiar to the ancients, of exposing or murdering
      their new-born infants, was become every day more frequent in the
      provinces, and especially in Italy. It was the effect of
      distress; and the distress was principally occasioned by the
      intolerant burden of taxes, and by the vexatious as well as cruel
      prosecutions of the officers of the revenue against their
      insolvent debtors. The less opulent or less industrious part of
      mankind, instead of rejoicing in an increase of family, deemed it
      an act of paternal tenderness to release their children from the
      impending miseries of a life which they themselves were unable to
      support. The humanity of Constantine, moved, perhaps, by some
      recent and extraordinary instances of despair, engaged him to
      address an edict to all the cities of Italy, and afterwards of
      Africa, directing immediate and sufficient relief to be given to
      those parents who should produce before the magistrates the
      children whom their own poverty would not allow them to educate.
      But the promise was too liberal, and the provision too vague, to
      effect any general or permanent benefit. 93 The law, though it
      may merit some praise, served rather to display than to alleviate
      the public distress. It still remains an authentic monument to
      contradict and confound those venal orators, who were too well
      satisfied with their own situation to discover either vice or
      misery under the government of a generous sovereign. 94 2. The
      laws of Constantine against rapes were dictated with very little
      indulgence for the most amiable weaknesses of human nature; since
      the description of that crime was applied not only to the brutal
      violence which compelled, but even to the gentle seduction which
      might persuade, an unmarried woman, under the age of twenty-five,
      to leave the house of her parents. “The successful ravisher was
      punished with death;” and as if simple death was inadequate to
      the enormity of his guilt, he was either burnt alive, or torn in
      pieces by wild beasts in the amphitheatre. The virgin’s
      declaration, that she had been carried away with her own consent,
      instead of saving her lover, exposed her to share his fate. The
      duty of a public prosecution was intrusted to the parents of the
      guilty or unfortunate maid; and if the sentiments of nature
      prevailed on them to dissemble the injury, and to repair by a
      subsequent marriage the honor of their family, they were
      themselves punished by exile and confiscation. The slaves,
      whether male or female, who were convicted of having been
      accessory to rape or seduction, were burnt alive, or put to death
      by the ingenious torture of pouring down their throats a quantity
      of melted lead. As the crime was of a public kind, the accusation
      was permitted even to strangers.9401


      9401 (return) [ This explanation appears to me little probable.
      Godefroy has made a much more happy conjecture, supported by all
      the historical circumstances which relate to this edict. It was
      published the 12th of May, A. D. 315. at Naissus in Pannonia, the
      birthplace of Constantine. The 8th of October, in that year,
      Constantine gained the victory of Cibalis over Licinius. He was
      yet uncertain as to the fate of the war: the Christians, no
      doubt, whom he favored, had prophesied his victory. Lactantius,
      then preceptor of Crispus, had just written his work upon
      Christianity, (his Divine Institutes;) he had dedicated it to
      Constantine. In this book he had inveighed with great force
      against infanticide, and the exposure of infants, (l. vi. c. 20.)
      Is it not probable that Constantine had read this work, that he
      had conversed on the subject with Lactantius, that he was moved,
      among other things, by the passage to which I have referred, and
      in the first transport of his enthusiasm, he published the edict
      in question? The whole of the edict bears the character of
      precipitation, of excitement, (entrainement,) rather than of
      deliberate reflection—the extent of the promises, the
      indefiniteness of the means, of the conditions, and of the time
      during which the parents might have a right to the succor of the
      state. Is there not reason to believe that the humanity of
      Constantine was excited by the influence of Lactantius, by that
      of the principles of Christianity, and of the Christians
      themselves, already in high esteem with the emperor, rather than
      by some “extraordinary instances of despair”? * * * See
      Hegewisch, Essai Hist. sur les Finances Romaines. The edict for
      Africa was not published till 322: of that we may say in truth
      that its origin was in the misery of the times. Africa had
      suffered much from the cruelty of Maxentius. Constantine says
      expressly, that he had learned that parents, under the pressure
      of distress, were there selling their children. This decree is
      more distinct, more maturely deliberated than the former; the
      succor which was to be given to the parents, and the source from
      which it was to be derived, are determined. (Code Theod. l. xi.
      tit. 27, c 2.) If the direct utility of these laws may not have
      been very extensive, they had at least the great and happy effect
      of establishing a decisive opposition between the principles of
      the government and those which, at this time, had prevailed among
      the subjects of the empire.—G.]


      The commencement of the action was not limited to any term of
      years, and the consequences of the sentence were extended to the
      innocent offspring of such an irregular union. 95 But whenever
      the offence inspires less horror than the punishment, the rigor
      of penal law is obliged to give way to the common feelings of
      mankind. The most odious parts of this edict were softened or
      repealed in the subsequent reigns; 96 and even Constantine
      himself very frequently alleviated, by partial acts of mercy, the
      stern temper of his general institutions. Such, indeed, was the
      singular humor of that emperor, who showed himself as indulgent,
      and even remiss, in the execution of his laws, as he was severe,
      and even cruel, in the enacting of them. It is scarcely possible
      to observe a more decisive symptom of weakness, either in the
      character of the prince, or in the constitution of the
      government. 97


      93 (return) [ Codex Theodosian. l. xi. tit. 27, tom. iv. p. 188,
      with Godefroy’s observations. See likewise l. v. tit. 7, 8.]


      94 (return) [ Omnia foris placita, domi prospera, annonæ
      ubertate, fructuum copia, &c. Panegyr. Vet. x. 38. This oration
      of Nazarius was pronounced on the day of the Quinquennalia of the
      Cæsars, the 1st of March, A. D. 321.]


      95 (return) [ See the edict of Constantine, addressed to the
      Roman people, in the Theodosian Code, l. ix. tit. 24, tom. iii.
      p. 189.]


      96 (return) [ His son very fairly assigns the true reason of the
      repeal: “Na sub specie atrocioris judicii aliqua in ulciscendo
      crimine dilatio næ ceretur.” Cod. Theod. tom. iii. p. 193]


      97 (return) [ Eusebius (in Vita Constant. l. iii. c. 1) chooses
      to affirm, that in the reign of this hero, the sword of justice
      hung idle in the hands of the magistrates. Eusebius himself, (l.
      iv. c. 29, 54,) and the Theodosian Code, will inform us that this
      excessive lenity was not owing to the want either of atrocious
      criminals or of penal laws.]


      The civil administration was sometimes interrupted by the
      military defence of the empire. Crispus, a youth of the most
      amiable character, who had received with the title of Cæsar the
      command of the Rhine, distinguished his conduct, as well as
      valor, in several victories over the Franks and Alemanni, and
      taught the barbarians of that frontier to dread the eldest son of
      Constantine, and the grandson of Constantius. 98 The emperor
      himself had assumed the more difficult and important province of
      the Danube. The Goths, who in the time of Claudius and Aurelian
      had felt the weight of the Roman arms, respected the power of the
      empire, even in the midst of its intestine divisions. But the
      strength of that warlike nation was now restored by a peace of
      near fifty years; a new generation had arisen, who no longer
      remembered the misfortunes of ancient days; the Sarmatians of the
      Lake Mæotis followed the Gothic standard either as subjects or as
      allies, and their united force was poured upon the countries of
      Illyricum. Campona, Margus, and Benonia, 982 appear to have been
      the scenes of several memorable sieges and battles; 99 and though
      Constantine encountered a very obstinate resistance, he prevailed
      at length in the contest, and the Goths were compelled to
      purchased an ignominious retreat, by restoring the booty and
      prisoners which they had taken. Nor was this advantage sufficient
      to satisfy the indignation of the emperor. He resolved to
      chastise as well as to repulse the insolent barbarians who had
      dared to invade the territories of Rome. At the head of his
      legions he passed the Danube, after repairing the bridge which
      had been constructed by Trajan, penetrated into the strongest
      recesses of Dacia, 100 and when he had inflicted a severe
      revenge, condescended to give peace to the suppliant Goths, on
      condition that, as often as they were required, they should
      supply his armies with a body of forty thousand soldiers. 101
      Exploits like these were no doubt honorable to Constantine, and
      beneficial to the state; but it may surely be questioned, whether
      they can justify the exaggerated assertion of Eusebius, that ALL
      SCYTHIA, as far as the extremity of the North, divided as it was
      into so many names and nations of the most various and savage
      manners, had been added by his victorious arms to the Roman
      empire. 102


      98 (return) [ Nazarius in Panegyr. Vet. x. The victory of Crispus
      over the Alemanni is expressed on some medals. * Note: Other
      medals are extant, the legends of which commemorate the success
      of Constantine over the Sarmatians and other barbarous nations,
      Sarmatia Devicta. Victoria Gothica. Debellatori Gentium
      Barbarorum. Exuperator Omnium Gentium. St. Martin, note on Le
      Beau, i. 148.—M.]


      982 (return) [ Campona, Old Buda in Hungary; Margus, Benonia,
      Widdin, in Mæsia—G and M.]


      99 (return) [ See Zosimus, l. ii. p. 93, 94; though the narrative
      of that historian is neither clear nor consistent. The Panegyric
      of Optatianus (c. 23) mentions the alliance of the Sarmatians
      with the Carpi and Getæ, and points out the several fields of
      battle. It is supposed that the Sarmatian games, celebrated in
      the month of November, derived their origin from the success of
      this war.]


      100 (return) [ In the Cæsars of Julian, (p. 329. Commentaire de
      Spanheim, p. 252.) Constantine boasts, that he had recovered the
      province (Dacia) which Trajan had subdued. But it is insinuated
      by Silenus, that the conquests of Constantine were like the
      gardens of Adonis, which fade and wither almost the moment they
      appear.]


      101 (return) [ Jornandes de Rebus Geticis, c. 21. I know not
      whether we may entirely depend on his authority. Such an alliance
      has a very recent air, and scarcely is suited to the maxims of
      the beginning of the fourth century.]


      102 (return) [ Eusebius in Vit. Constantin. l. i. c. 8. This
      passage, however, is taken from a general declamation on the
      greatness of Constantine, and not from any particular account of
      the Gothic war.]


      In this exalted state of glory, it was impossible that
      Constantine should any longer endure a partner in the empire.
      Confiding in the superiority of his genius and military power, he
      determined, without any previous injury, to exert them for the
      destruction of Licinius, whose advanced age and unpopular vices
      seemed to offer a very easy conquest. 103 But the old emperor,
      awakened by the approaching danger, deceived the expectations of
      his friends, as well as of his enemies. Calling forth that spirit
      and those abilities by which he had deserved the friendship of
      Galerius and the Imperial purple, he prepared himself for the
      contest, collected the forces of the East, and soon filled the
      plains of Hadrianople with his troops, and the straits of the
      Hellespont with his fleet. The army consisted of one hundred and
      fifty thousand foot, and fifteen thousand horse; and as the
      cavalry was drawn, for the most part, from Phrygia and
      Cappadocia, we may conceive a more favorable opinion of the
      beauty of the horses, than of the courage and dexterity of their
      riders. The fleet was composed of three hundred and fifty galleys
      of three ranks of oars. A hundred and thirty of these were
      furnished by Egypt and the adjacent coast of Africa. A hundred
      and ten sailed from the ports of Phœnicia and the isle of Cyprus;
      and the maritime countries of Bithynia, Ionia, and Caria were
      likewise obliged to provide a hundred and ten galleys. The troops
      of Constantine were ordered to a rendezvous at Thessalonica; they
      amounted to above a hundred and twenty thousand horse and foot.
      104 Their emperor was satisfied with their martial appearance,
      and his army contained more soldiers, though fewer men, than that
      of his eastern competitor. The legions of Constantine were levied
      in the warlike provinces of Europe; action had confirmed their
      discipline, victory had elevated their hopes, and there were
      among them a great number of veterans, who, after seventeen
      glorious campaigns under the same leader, prepared themselves to
      deserve an honorable dismission by a last effort of their valor.
      105 But the naval preparations of Constantine were in every
      respect much inferior to those of Licinius. The maritime cities
      of Greece sent their respective quotas of men and ships to the
      celebrated harbor of Piræus, and their united forces consisted of
      no more than two hundred small vessels—a very feeble armament, if
      it is compared with those formidable fleets which were equipped
      and maintained by the republic of Athens during the Peloponnesian
      war. 106 Since Italy was no longer the seat of government, the
      naval establishments of Misenum and Ravenna had been gradually
      neglected; and as the shipping and mariners of the empire were
      supported by commerce rather than by war, it was natural that
      they should the most abound in the industrious provinces of Egypt
      and Asia. It is only surprising that the eastern emperor, who
      possessed so great a superiority at sea, should have neglected
      the opportunity of carrying an offensive war into the centre of
      his rival’s dominions.


      103 (return) [ Constantinus tamen, vir ingens, et omnia efficere
      nitens quæ animo præparasset, simul principatum totius urbis
      affectans, Licinio bellum intulit. Eutropius, x. 5. Zosimus, l.
      ii. p 89. The reasons which they have assigned for the first
      civil war, may, with more propriety, be applied to the second.]


      104 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 94, 95.]


      105 (return) [ Constantine was very attentive to the privileges
      and comforts of his fellow-veterans, (Conveterani,) as he now
      began to style them. See the Theodosian Code, l. vii. tit. 10,
      tom. ii. p. 419, 429.]


      106 (return) [ Whilst the Athenians maintained the empire of the
      sea, their fleet consisted of three, and afterwards of four,
      hundred galleys of three ranks of oars, all completely equipped
      and ready for immediate service. The arsenal in the port of
      Piræus had cost the republic a thousand talents, about two
      hundred and sixteen thousand pounds. See Thucydides de Bel.
      Pelopon. l. ii. c. 13, and Meursius de Fortuna Attica, c. 19.]


      Instead of embracing such an active resolution, which might have
      changed the whole face of the war, the prudent Licinius expected
      the approach of his rival in a camp near Hadrianople, which he
      had fortified with an anxious care that betrayed his apprehension
      of the event. Constantine directed his march from Thessalonica
      towards that part of Thrace, till he found himself stopped by the
      broad and rapid stream of the Hebrus, and discovered the numerous
      army of Licinius, which filled the steep ascent of the hill, from
      the river to the city of Hadrianople. Many days were spent in
      doubtful and distant skirmishes; but at length the obstacles of
      the passage and of the attack were removed by the intrepid
      conduct of Constantine. In this place we might relate a wonderful
      exploit of Constantine, which, though it can scarcely be
      paralleled either in poetry or romance, is celebrated, not by a
      venal orator devoted to his fortune, but by an historian, the
      partial enemy of his fame. We are assured that the valiant
      emperor threw himself into the River Hebrus, accompanied only by
      _twelve_ horsemen, and that by the effort or terror of his
      invincible arm, he broke, slaughtered, and put to flight a host
      of a hundred and fifty thousand men. The credulity of Zosimus
      prevailed so strongly over his passion, that among the events of
      the memorable battle of Hadrianople, he seems to have selected
      and embellished, not the most important, but the most marvellous.
      The valor and danger of Constantine are attested by a slight
      wound which he received in the thigh; but it may be discovered
      even from an imperfect narration, and perhaps a corrupted text,
      that the victory was obtained no less by the conduct of the
      general than by the courage of the hero; that a body of five
      thousand archers marched round to occupy a thick wood in the rear
      of the enemy, whose attention was diverted by the construction of
      a bridge, and that Licinius, perplexed by so many artful
      evolutions, was reluctantly drawn from his advantageous post to
      combat on equal ground on the plain. The contest was no longer
      equal. His confused multitude of new levies was easily vanquished
      by the experienced veterans of the West. Thirty-four thousand men
      are reported to have been slain. The fortified camp of Licinius
      was taken by assault the evening of the battle; the greater part
      of the fugitives, who had retired to the mountains, surrendered
      themselves the next day to the discretion of the conqueror; and
      his rival, who could no longer keep the field, confined himself
      within the walls of Byzantium. 107


      107 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 95, 96. This great battle is
      described in the Valesian fragment, (p. 714,) in a clear though
      concise manner. “Licinius vero circum Hadrianopolin maximo
      exercitu latera ardui montis impleverat; illuc toto agmine
      Constantinus inflexit. Cum bellum terra marique traheretur,
      quamvis per arduum suis nitentibus, attamen disciplina militari
      et felicitate, Constantinus Licinu confusum et sine ordine
      agentem vicit exercitum; leviter femore sau ciatus.”]


      The siege of Byzantium, which was immediately undertaken by
      Constantine, was attended with great labor and uncertainty. In
      the late civil wars, the fortifications of that place, so justly
      considered as the key of Europe and Asia, had been repaired and
      strengthened; and as long as Licinius remained master of the sea,
      the garrison was much less exposed to the danger of famine than
      the army of the besiegers. The naval commanders of Constantine
      were summoned to his camp, and received his positive orders to
      force the passage of the Hellespont, as the fleet of Licinius,
      instead of seeking and destroying their feeble enemy, continued
      inactive in those narrow straits, where its superiority of
      numbers was of little use or advantage. Crispus, the emperor’s
      eldest son, was intrusted with the execution of this daring
      enterprise, which he performed with so much courage and success,
      that he deserved the esteem, and most probably excited the
      jealousy, of his father. The engagement lasted two days; and in
      the evening of the first, the contending fleets, after a
      considerable and mutual loss, retired into their respective
      harbors of Europe and Asia. The second day, about noon, a strong
      south wind 108 sprang up, which carried the vessels of Crispus
      against the enemy; and as the casual advantage was improved by
      his skilful intrepidity, he soon obtained a complete victory. A
      hundred and thirty vessels were destroyed, five thousand men were
      slain, and Amandus, the admiral of the Asiatic fleet, escaped
      with the utmost difficulty to the shores of Chalcedon. As soon as
      the Hellespont was open, a plentiful convoy of provisions flowed
      into the camp of Constantine, who had already advanced the
      operations of the siege. He constructed artificial mounds of
      earth of an equal height with the ramparts of Byzantium. The
      lofty towers which were erected on that foundation galled the
      besieged with large stones and darts from the military engines,
      and the battering rams had shaken the walls in several places. If
      Licinius persisted much longer in the defence, he exposed himself
      to be involved in the ruin of the place. Before he was
      surrounded, he prudently removed his person and treasures to
      Chalcedon in Asia; and as he was always desirous of associating
      companions to the hopes and dangers of his fortune, he now
      bestowed the title of Cæsar on Martinianus, who exercised one of
      the most important offices of the empire. 109


      108 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 97, 98. The current always sets
      out of the Hellespont; and when it is assisted by a north wind,
      no vessel can attempt the passage. A south wind renders the force
      of the current almost imperceptible. See Tournefort’s Voyage au
      Levant, Let. xi.]


      109 (return) [ Aurelius Victor. Zosimus, l. ii. p. 93. According
      to the latter, Martinianus was Magister Officiorum, (he uses the
      Latin appellation in Greek.) Some medals seem to intimate, that
      during his short reign he received the title of Augustus.]


      Such were still the resources, and such the abilities, of
      Licinius, that, after so many successive defeats, he collected in
      Bithynia a new army of fifty or sixty thousand men, while the
      activity of Constantine was employed in the siege of Byzantium.
      The vigilant emperor did not, however, neglect the last struggles
      of his antagonist. A considerable part of his victorious army was
      transported over the Bosphorus in small vessels, and the decisive
      engagement was fought soon after their landing on the heights of
      Chrysopolis, or, as it is now called, of Scutari. The troops of
      Licinius, though they were lately raised, ill armed, and worse
      disciplined, made head against their conquerors with fruitless
      but desperate valor, till a total defeat, and a slaughter of five
      and twenty thousand men, irretrievably determined the fate of
      their leader. 110 He retired to Nicomedia, rather with the view
      of gaining some time for negotiation, than with the hope of any
      effectual defence. Constantia, his wife, and the sister of
      Constantine, interceded with her brother in favor of her husband,
      and obtained from his policy, rather than from his compassion, a
      solemn promise, confirmed by an oath, that after the sacrifice of
      Martinianus, and the resignation of the purple, Licinius himself
      should be permitted to pass the remainder of this life in peace
      and affluence. The behavior of Constantia, and her relation to
      the contending parties, naturally recalls the remembrance of that
      virtuous matron who was the sister of Augustus, and the wife of
      Antony. But the temper of mankind was altered, and it was no
      longer esteemed infamous for a Roman to survive his honor and
      independence. Licinius solicited and accepted the pardon of his
      offences, laid himself and his purple at the feet of his _lord_
      and _master_, was raised from the ground with insulting pity, was
      admitted the same day to the Imperial banquet, and soon
      afterwards was sent away to Thessalonica, which had been chosen
      for the place of his confinement. 111 His confinement was soon
      terminated by death, and it is doubtful whether a tumult of the
      soldiers, or a decree of the senate, was suggested as the motive
      for his execution. According to the rules of tyranny, he was
      accused of forming a conspiracy, and of holding a treasonable
      correspondence with the barbarians; but as he was never
      convicted, either by his own conduct or by any legal evidence, we
      may perhaps be allowed, from his weakness, to presume his
      innocence. 112 The memory of Licinius was branded with infamy,
      his statues were thrown down, and by a hasty edict, of such
      mischievous tendency that it was almost immediately corrected,
      all his laws, and all the judicial proceedings of his reign, were
      at once abolished. 113 By this victory of Constantine, the Roman
      world was again united under the authority of one emperor,
      thirty-seven years after Diocletian had divided his power and
      provinces with his associate Maximian.


      110 (return) [ Eusebius (in Vita Constantin. I. ii. c. 16, 17)
      ascribes this decisive victory to the pious prayers of the
      emperor. The Valesian fragment (p. 714) mentions a body of Gothic
      auxiliaries, under their chief Aliquaca, who adhered to the party
      of Licinius.]


      111 (return) [ Zosimus, l. ii. p. 102. Victor Junior in Epitome.
      Anonym. Valesian. p. 714.]


      112 (return) [ Contra religionem sacramenti Thessalonicæ privatus
      occisus est. Eutropius, x. 6; and his evidence is confirmed by
      Jerome (in Chronic.) as well as by Zosimus, l. ii. p. 102. The
      Valesian writer is the only one who mentions the soldiers, and it
      is Zonaras alone who calls in the assistance of the senate.
      Eusebius prudently slides over this delicate transaction. But
      Sozomen, a century afterwards, ventures to assert the treasonable
      practices of Licinius.]


      113 (return) [ See the Theodosian Code, l. xv. tit. 15, tom. v. p
      404, 405. These edicts of Constantine betray a degree of passion
      and precipitation very unbecoming the character of a lawgiver.]


      The successive steps of the elevation of Constantine, from his
      first assuming the purple at York, to the resignation of
      Licinius, at Nicomedia, have been related with some minuteness
      and precision, not only as the events are in themselves both
      interesting and important, but still more, as they contributed to
      the decline of the empire by the expense of blood and treasure,
      and by the perpetual increase, as well of the taxes, as of the
      military establishment. The foundation of Constantinople, and the
      establishment of the Christian religion, were the immediate and
      memorable consequences of this revolution.
